ANTH116,Introduction to Anthropology, (4 Credits)| This course is an introduction to the discipline of anthropology, with particular focus on the methods, theory and conceptual framework of socio- cultural anthropology. All topics will be addressed in anthropological and Christian terms, including such issues as race, gender, language, globalization, and marriage. Freshmen and Sophomores only, except by consent of instructor. Legacy diversity designation. Meets legacy general education requirement.
ANTH282,Culture Travel and Tourism, (2 Credits)| Tourism and other forms of international travel have become important sites of anthropological inquiry as increasing numbers of people have their most significant cross-cultural experiences through the travel industry, either as participants or providers. This course will explore the anthropological literature around these phenomena, with a focus on the consequences of such travel for the construction of culture and cultural differences.
ANTH319,Colonialism and Redemption: Native American Culture and Theology from 1492 to Wounded Knee, (2 Credits)| An interdisciplinary course designed to explore the Native American experience through the lens of historical anthropology and theology. The course explores the experience and perspectives of the Native inhabitants of Turtle Island from the beginning of the colonial era up to the present day. The course also examines the role of Scripture, theology, and the Church during the time of European expansion across North America and the current relationship between First Nations peoples and Christianity, including developments in Native Christian theology. Meetings with Native Americans are part of the course. The themes of colonialism and redemption will bind together this theological, anthropological, and personal exploration. Legacy diversity designation. Meets legacy general education requirement.
ANTH324,Anthropology of Global Christianity, (2 Credits)| This course explores the diverse manifestations of Christianity around the globe. Using anthropological theory and method, particular attention will be paid to the non-Western church, exploring the relationship between the Gospel and culture around the world. Legacy diversity designation.
ANTH331,Cultural Immersion Experience, (0 Credits)| A department approved cultural immersion experience.
ANTH341,Consumption and Material Culture, (2 Credits)| This class integrates the relationships between people and the things they consume. In particular, it is interested in the ways in which identities and relationships are generated through the processes and events of consumption. Case studies will be drawn from multiple national and international contexts and will highlight the embeddedness of these processes within the larger social and cultural systems.
ANTH353,Biculturalism, (4 Credits)| Principles of anthropology that highlight understanding of, and adapting to, other cultures, with focus on the problems of cross-cultural adaptation and ministry for the Christian. Relevant for HNGR interns, missions, C.E., and Biblical Studies majors, and all who are interested in cross-cultural work. Legacy diversity designation. Meets legacy general education requirement.
ANTH354,Culture in the Contemporary World, (4 Credits)| Exploring how culture relates to identity, interpretation of Scripture, and the practice of the Christian life, this course provides students with an understanding of basic anthropological approaches to culture and how those approaches relate to contemporary issues such as racialization, language ideology, conceptions of gender, neocolonialism, and missions. Requires sophomore standing and above or consent of instructor. Legacy diversity designation. Meets legacy general education requirement.
ANTH361,Medical Anthropology, (2 Credits)| Cultural differences in conceptions of illness and health care, and the processes of change in medical systems throughout the contemporary world. Relevant for health care professions, missions, HNGR. Legacy diversity designation.
ANTH364,Linguistic Anthropology, (2 Credits)| This course will address language from an anthrpological perspective. This will include technical linguistic theory (phonetics/phonemics), but whereas much of that is covered in linguistics courses, this course will spend far more time on socio-linguistics and language ideology, particularly in the colonial and post-colonial context of the non-Western world. Students will be able to identify and apply the major historic and contemporary anthropological theories of language.
ANTH376,Culture Theory, (4 Credits)| The culture concept has gone through numerous transformations since it was first introduced into anthropology in the nineteenth century, and this course briefly surveys historical theories in anthropology, but highlights structuralist, poststructuralist, postmodernist, Marxist, feminist, postcolonial, and transaction theories.
ANTH381,Politics of Veiling in the Modern Middle East, (2 Credits)| This course approaches the diversity of life in the modern Middle East through the practices of veiling. Rather than a singular model or symbol, the veil emerges as a material object invested with various meanings through the complex intertwining of political, religious, and social life in societies from North Africa to Central Asia, and increasingly, the rest of the world. Legacy diversity designation.
ANTH383,Cities in the Global South, (2 Credits)| See URBN 383.
ANTH385,Field Research Methods, (4 Credits)| See HNGR 385.
ANTH393,Placemaking in Urban Contexts, (2 Credits)| See URBN 393.
ANTH431,Culture Economy and Morality, (4 Credits)| This course explores the diverse ways people answer moral questions about money and economics. The course focuses on how culture shapes our interpretations of the economic choices we deem right and wrong. By considering case studies of economic moralities in diverse cultural contexts, students will develop more nuanced understandings of Biblical perspectives on economic topics including generosity, consumption, work, capitalism, and inequality.
ANTH432,Violence and Peace in Latin America, (4 Credits)| This course draws on anthropological and social scientific research to examine how diverse organizational and social actors work to confront violence and strengthen peace in Latin America. Students will learn about the history of state, political and criminal violence in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, and students will be introduced to the efforts of international justice and human rights activists and civil society and religious organizations to build more just, peaceful, and inclusive societies in Latin America.
ANTH435,Power and Gender in Southeast Asia, (4 Credits)| Anthropologists generally have made conceptions of power and gender key concepts in their work around the globe. Anthropologists working in Southeast Asia have made particular contributions to these discussions, through cultural examples that are frequently quite distinct from European and Euro-American conceptions. From traditional sultanates in Java, to the modern urban megacities of Thailand and Malaysia, this course will explore, through historical investigations and contemporary cultural forms, questions of how power and gender intersect in this region of the world. Legacy diversity designation.
ANTH478,Anthropology Through Film, (2 Credits)| The medium of film can provide a window into the heart of a society, giving the viewer a chance to see inside the culture and minds of a people. This course will use commercial (Hollywood) films as opportunities to explore themes and theories in anthropology, in order to gain insight into anthropological concepts and the society(ies) or subcultures from which the films originate. Legacy diversity designation.
ANTH481,Anthropological Writing: Writing in History and the Social Sciences, (2 Credits)| This is a course for students who want to write for scholarly and general audiences. It is an opportunity to strengthen writing skills and analytical techniques. In this intensive writing course, advanced anthropology (and related disciplines) students will get a hands-on experience of gathering and/or using original data (ethnographic, archival, statistical, geo-spatial, etc.), transforming it into evidence (by analyzing it using relevant theoretical methods) and then writing a compelling analytical argument that connects the research findings to important social scientific questions. The course is particularly relevant for those who have previously collected data (such as HNGR or other study abroad students) they are prepared to use in a substantial writing project.
ANTH482,Ethnographic Theory and Method, (4 Credits)| This course analyzes anthropological research and writing on fieldwork, while cultivating students’ skills in the practice of ethnography. The production of knowledge, problems of evidence, experience and ethics, as well as issues of power and representation are discussed. Students frame and address theoretical problems through the development of an ethnographic research project, and through the processes of peer review, they refine this project throughout the semester, culminating in an original piece of anthropological research. Legacy diversity designation.
ANTH494,Senior Capstone, (4 Credits)| A capstone seminar which evaluates contemporary issues within anthropology to address the relationship between Christianity and anthropological epistemologies, theories, and methods.
ANTH495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Guided reading and research for the advanced students, or research internship in ongoing institutional or faculty research. Prerequisite: Permission of department chair.
ANTH496,Internship in Anthropology, (4 or 8 Credits)| Credit given in connection with an internship assignment in medical anthropology, missions, HNGR, cross-cultural settings which involve education, development, business, or family life with participation of a faculty anthropologist. Majors may apply eight hours of internship credit toward one anthropology elective course. See department for details, including course prerequisites.
AHS101,Wellness, (2 Credits)| Students will be guided in a critical reflection of their health and wellness within the context of a Christian worldview. Special emphasis will be given to the development and maintenance of lifestyle habits that optimize well being.
AHS108,Rock Climbing, (1 Credit)| Basic skills in single-pitch top roping, sport climbing, and rappelling with an emphasis on proper technique and safety. Designed for beginner to intermediate climber. Course fee. Offered at HoneyRock only.
AHS115,Canoeing & Kayaking, (1 Credit)| The fundamentals of canoeing or kayaking are introduced with an emphasis on safety, refining skills, and using these skills as a means for pursuing physical fitness and wellness throughout a lifetime. Offered at HoneyRock over fall break and during the summer semester. Course fee. Offered at HoneyRock only.
AHS134,Equestrian Skills, (1 Credit)| An introduction to horseback riding using the western-style of riding to develop a balanced seat, with an emphasis on therapeutic applications. Course fee. Offered at HoneyRock only.
AHS136,Mountain Biking, (1 Credit)| The fundamentals of mountain biking and safe trail riding are introduced with an emphasis on refining skills and using this skill as a means for pursuing physical fitness and wellness throughout a lifetime. Course fee. Offered at HoneyRock only.
AHS138,Self Defense, (2 Credits)| A course for women and men which involves theory and practice of self-defense techniques based on several of the martial arts. Special emphasis on prevention and defense from sexual assaults. (Wheaton Campus only).
AHS141,Skiing - Cross Country, (1 Credit)| Introduction to flat, uphill, and downhill cross-country classic skills such as diagonal striding and double-poling and freestyle skating. Equipment, waxing, conditioning, and winter safety will be addressed. Course is held Martin Luther King weekend at HoneyRock and at Wheaton the 1st and 3rd Monday evening classes in January. Course fee. Offered at HoneyRock only.
AHS142,Skiing - Downhill, (1 Credit)| Basic through intermediate skills related to parallel skiing including PSIA ski instruction and videotaping. Course fee. Offered at HoneyRock only.
AHS148,Backpacking & Orienteering, (1 Credit)| The principles of backpacking and orienteering are introduced with an emphasis on using these outdoor skills as a means of pursuing physical fitness and wellness throughout a lifetime. Course fee. Offered at HoneyRock only.
AHS271,Research Methods, (2 Credits)| This course is a study and application of research methods and statistics within the applied health sciences. Course objectives include: describe the purposes of research and how they relate to one’s role as a producer and consumer of research; properly perform the process of research writing as it relates to the applied health sciences; develop an understanding and application for statistical concepts; and appropriately select and adequately perform valid and reliable measures to evaluate research findings.
AHS273,Behavioral Medicine, (2 Credits)| This course examines the evolution and development of many of the best practices used by allied health professionals to positively change health behavior. Specific attention will be given to how groups and systems either enhance or inhibit the behavioral change process. Students are expected to not only master academic content but to experientially participate in laboratory assignments that apply theoretical principles.
AHS281,Biostatistics, (4 Credits)| The purpose of this course is to train students to become intimately familiar with the basics of research design and statistical modeling techniques commonly used in the health sciences. Knowledge will be gained as students learn how to go from hypothesis generation, to appropriate research design, to the implementation of a statistical model, to the interpretation of results.
AHS351,Human Anatomy, (4 Credits)| This course covers the basic concepts of human anatomy, with emphasis on both the gross and cellular characteristics of each system. It includes discussion on how structure affects function while examining different clinical scenarios. Laboratory sessions will include human cadaver and specimen dissection, along with histological slides to reinforce concepts discussed in lectures. This course is intended to serve students interested in the health professions. Prerequisite: BIOL 241 or department permission. Lab fee.
AHS361,Integrative Human Physiology, (4 Credits)| This course presents the integrative physiology of the respiratory, cardiovascular, muscular, nervous, renal, digestive, endocrine, immune, and reproductive systems. Cellular and metabolic regulation will be integrated into organ/systems regulation. Normal and disease conditions (e.g., heart disease, diabetes) will be used as illustrations. The information in this course will be integrated into specific upper division courses and is directly applicable to those in the health sciences. Pre or Corequisite: CHEM 231 or CHEM 232; Prerequisites: BIOL 241 and AHS 351 or department permission. Lab fee.
AHS362,Orthopedic & Athletic Injury, (2 Credits)| A study of the mechanism, treatment, rehabilitation, and prevention of musculoskeletal injury. The course begins with the study of the injury process from a physiological and biomechanical perspective. The course then progresses into the study of specific injuries to the various areas of the body. The course concludes with the study of various treatment modalities utilized in the health care arena. Departmental adjunct faculty and health professionals from the community serve to expand the course content within their area of expertise. Prerequisites or corequisites: AHS 351, AHS 361 or department permission. $10 course fee.
AHS368,Concepts in Nutrition, (4 Credits)| This course includes the theory and techniques of nutrition, dieting, and proper weight control. Digestion and absorption of foodstuffs will be presented at the biochemical and applied physiological levels. Experimentally based research projects and case studies will be accomplished in small groups. Pre/Corequisite: AHS 361; prerequisites: AHS 271, AHS 351, or department permission.
AHS371,Clinical Kinesiology, (4 Credits)| This course will study the biomechanical forces involved in human movement. Applications will include the study of normal human movement, abnormal/pathological movement (e.g. abnormal gait analysis, rehabilitation aspects of movement), as well as sport and exercise biomechanics. Attention will be given to both the quantitative and qualitative analysis of movement. Prerequisites: AHS 271, 351, 361, and 452.
AHS378,Community Health and the Urban Environment, (4 Credits)| This course provides a basic introduction to the history, structure, and function of the public health system as it applies to the urban environment. Aspects of the economic, social, physical and built environments that impact the health of urban populations will be examined in the context of community organizing, program planning, health promotion and disease prevention throughout the lifespan, minority health, mental health, environmental and workplace safety and the delivery of adequate and equitable healthcare services. Prerequisites: BIOL 201 or 241 or 242.
AHS381,Concepts in Epidemiology, (4 Credits)| An introductory course of the basic science of disease prevention. Overview of epidemiologic methods and research designs to explore the variation of disease occurrence among individuals and populations and how that variation is studied to understand the causes of disease. Discussion of the biologic, behavioral, social and environmental determinants of health and disease. Description of how epidemiologic findings are applied to health maintenance and disease prevention. Prerequisite: AHS 271.
AHS384,Public Health: Physical Activity Promotion, (2 Credits)| This course addresses public health concepts and issues related to physical inactivity and attempts to prepare the student to work alongside of public agencies and communities to understand the link between physical activity and chronic diseases and how to strategize appropriate interventions. Students will have the opportunity to connect theory and practice through dialogue with public health practitioners and community leaders.
AHS387,Prevention of Obesity and Eating Disorders, (2 Credits)| This course will examine the causes of eating disorders and obesity from a multidisciplinary perspective. Personal, environmental, and socio-cultural factors driving eating disturbances that disrupt biological regulatory mechanisms of food intake and the maintenance of healthy body weight will be explored. A public health strategy that focuses on health rather than strict control of body weight will be presented as an effective and comprehensive approach for prevention of obesity and eating disorders. Prerequisites: AHS 101 and BIOL 201 or 241 or 242 or CHEM 231.
AHS391,Community-Based Research in Urban Public Health, (4 Credits)| Theory and practice of public health program planning and evaluation in partnership with community public health organizations in urban Chicago. Students will integrate principles of community building and organizing to address community-identified health issues in the context of social change. Emphasis will be placed upon the development of faith-based cultural humility for the recognition and empowerment of existing healthy community assets for the improvement of urban health and quality of life. Quantitative and qualitative research methods will be utilized and integrated throughout all phases of health planning and program evaluation. Prerequisites: AHS 378 and AHS 381. $50 course fee. Legacy diversity designation.
AHS394,Topics in Applied Health Science, (2 or 4 Credits)| Specific topics in Applied Health Science not normally included in the curriculum.
AHS401,Nutrition & Disease, (2 Credits)| The content of the course will cover common chronic diseases, their characteristics, their etiology and treatment. The students should be able to explain how a particular disease develops or at least what we know of its development and how nutrients may protect against its development. Prerequisite: AHS 368.
AHS451,Advanced Human Anatomy, (2 Credits)| This course covers advanced concepts of human cadaver anatomy. A thorough general dissection of the entire body with various in-depth dissections throughout the course will be the focus. This course is intended to serve students interested in the health professions. Prerequisite: AHS 351.
AHS452,Applied Physiology, (4 Credits)| This course will present the applied physiology of the following conditions: heart disease, obesity, type-2 diabetes mellitus, lower limb amputations, pregnancy, and aging and the role of prescribed exercise in the management and rehabilitation of these conditions. The physiological and biochemical adjustments and adaptations to acute and chronic exercise will be presented. Experimentally based research projects will be accomplished in small groups. Prerequisites: AHS 271, 351 and 361 or departmental permission. $75 lab fee.
AHS461,Advanced Anatomy II, (2 Credits)| Advanced subject material in human anatomy cadaver dissection. Dissections will be completely difference than those covered in AHS 451. Examples include the spinal cord with brachial and sacral plexus, intricacies of the hand, foot, shoulder or knee, nerves of the abdominal pelvic cavity. Prerequisite: AHS 351.
AHS468,Advanced Nutrition: Vitamins, (2 Credits)| This course includes the in-depth study of fat- and water-soluble vitamins. The material will include their metabolism and their important role in optimal health. In addition, this course addresses their functions, bioavailability, hormonal regulation, requirements, deficiency and toxicity signs, and interrelation with other nutrients. Also, there will be reading and discussion on recent published articles involving these vitamins. Prerequisite: AHS 368.
AHS494,Integrative Seminar, (2 Credits)| This course is designed to provide an integrative conclusion to the major by reflecting on how a Christian liberal arts education has shaped students' knowledge and character, to connect the discipline of Applied Health Science within the broader context of liberal arts and the Christian faith, and to clarify/reaffirm vocational calling.
AHS495,Problems in Applied Health Science, (1 to 4 Credits)| Special projects and independent research study. These projects must offer a unique learning experience for the student and will usually be an experimentally based research project with the purpose of developing critical thinking and with the intent of being published.
AHS496,Internship, (4 to 8 Credits)| Practical experience under supervision in an approved program. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing as Applied Health Science major.
ARCH211,Old Testament Archaeology, (4 Credits)| A survey of the Old Testament with an emphasis on archaeological research as it relates to the understanding and interpretation of the text. This course fulfills the Old Testament general education requirement.
ARCH213,New Testament Archaeology, (4 Credits)| A survey of the New Testament with an emphasis on archaeological research as it relates to the understanding and interpretation of the text. This course fulfills the New Testament general education requirement.
ARCH317,Studies in Biblical Lands, (4 Credits)| A study of cultural, historical, geographical, and theological dimensions of the Old Testament, New Testament, and the Church through classroom lecture and travel to Israel, Greece, Turkey, and Rome. In addition, through contact with leaders and communities of non-western churches, Wheaton in the Holy Lands engages students with issues of the theological development of the Church through the centuries. This program can be taken as a partial alternative to the general education requirements in Biblical and Theological studies, or it can fill selected requirements in the Biblical Studies, Theological Studies, or Archaeology major. Su only
ARCH325,Archaeological Field Work, (4 Credits)| Field experience involving excavation, interpretation, and studies in related regional archaeology.
ARCH326,Archaeological Field Work: Tel Shimron Israel, (4 Credits)| Field experience involving excavation, interpretation, and studies in related regional archaeology.
ARCH327,Archaeological Science, (4 Credits)| Overview and practice of methods of archaeological science applied from geosciences, chemistry and biology (zoology and botany) in an active excavation. Understanding the historical influence of physical and environmental setting on the archaeological site in its regional context. Four hours lecture, 3 hours laboratory.
ARCH333,Historical Geography, (2 Credits)| See BITH 333.
ARCH334,Historical Geography, (2 Credits)| See BITH 334.
ARCH345,Archaeology of the Classical World, (2 Credits)| Excavations, monuments, epigraphic materials, and papyri from the Minoan, Mycenaean, Aegean, and Greco-Roman times. Prerequisite: ARCH 211 or 213
ARCH365,Statecraft and International Relations in the Ancient Near East, (4 Credits)| This course investigates the ways that statecraft and international politics were conducted in ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt. It addresses methods and theories for studying statecraft and international politics as well as considers how these were embedded within and shaped by the societies, cultures, and economies of Mesopotamia and Egypt.
ARCH366,Archaeology of Biblical Lands, (4 Credits)| A survey of archaeological and historical materials of Biblical Lands from prehistoric times through the Iron Age. Special attention is given to understanding the material culture of each period and the interface of biblical sources with these periods where appropriate. Four hours lecture, two hours laboratory. Pre-requisite: ARCH 211.
ARCH367,Jerusalem the Holy City, (4 Credits)| Jerusalem's special place in the biblical tradition is considered through the disciplines of archaeology and history. Special attention is given to the city's theological significance, as well as its place in the religious traditions and history of the Middle East. Prerequisite: ARCH 211 or BITH 211 or 221.
ARCH369,Religions of Israel and the Near East, (4 Credits)| This course introduces key theoretical approaches to the study of religion, explores significant literary sources and engages important syntheses of the religious traditions from ancient Mesopotamia, Egypt, Israel, and Canaan. In particular, it focuses on how these traditions contribute to long-standing issues in philosophy of religion, such as What is the nature of divinity?, What does it mean for humans to be religious?, How is evil and suffering explained?, and What are the philosophical origins and implications of monotheism? Prerequisite: ARCH 211 or BITH 211.
ARCH411,Advanced Archaeological Study, (4 Credits)| A concentrated analysis of one particular aspect of biblical archaeology or ancient Near Eastern studies.
ARCH412,Advanced Archaeological Study, (2 Credits)| A concentrated analysis of one particular aspect of biblical archaeology or ancient Near Eastern studies.
ARCH415,Ugaritic Language and Literature, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 515.
ARCH416,Classical Hebrew Inscriptions, (4 Credits)| This course is designed to introduce students to Classical Hebrew and Canaanite sources (inscriptions) for the history of the land of Canaan during the Old Testament period. In addition to mastering the grammar of the primary sources, students will be exposed to questions about the mechanics of writing, will explore the ancient social and cultural contexts of Canaan, and will specifically engage in discussions about the origins, nature, extent and purposes of literacy during this period. Prerequisite: HEBR 301. Cross-listed with ARCH 516.
ARCH417,Egyptian Hieroglyphics, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 517
ARCH418,Akkadian Cuneiform, (2 or 4 Credits)| See ARCH 518.
ARCH452,Jewish Backgrounds In NT, (2 Credits)| See BITH 552.
ARCH453,Advanced Archaeology and the Old Testament, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 521.
ARCH494,Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| A capstone seminar devoted to exploring the current issues in Near Eastern archaeology that relate to biblical studies, especially those touching on historiography, historicity, social and cultural backgrounds, methodology, and faith. Prerequisite: ARCH 412.
ARCH495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Independent study of selected problems for the advanced student.
ARCH515,Ugaritic Language and Literature, (4 Credits)| This course introduces students to the language, literature, and culture from the ancient city-state of Ugarit. It is designed to teach students essential morphology and syntax of the Ugaritic prose and poetic texts, to orientate students to the discipline of Ugaritology, and to facilitate a better understanding of the Old Testament through the study of its linguistic and cultural context. Prerequisite: HEBR 301 or permission of instructor.
ARCH516,Classical Hebrew Inscriptions, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 416.
ARCH517,Egyptian Hieroglyphics, (4 Credits)| An introduction to Middle Egyptian which involves learning how to read and translate texts.
ARCH518,Akkadian Cuneiform, (2 or 4 Credits)| An introduction to cuneiform which leads students through the techniques for transcription, transliteration, and translation of Assyrian or Babylonian literature.
ARCH521,Advanced Archaeology and the Old Testament, (4 Credits)| A study of ancient Near Eastern archaeological methods and materials and their relationship to the historical, social, and religious settings of the Old Testament, with special emphasis on Israel's early history and the monarchic periods.
ARCH525,Archaeological Field Work, (8 Credits)| Field experience involving excavation, interpretation, and studies in related regional archaeology.
ARCH526,Method & Theory, (2 Credits)| A basic examination of the field of archaeology and how the history of the field affects current practice. Graded pass/fail unless petitioned for a grade.
ARCH534,Historical Geography, (2 Credits)| See BITH 334.
ARCH545,Archaeology of the Classical World, (2 Credits)| Excavations, monuments, epigraphic materials, and papyri from the Minoan, Mycenaean, Aegean, and Greco-Roman times.
ARCH552,Jewish Backgrounds of the New Testament, (2 Credits)| See BITH 552.
ARCH554,Topics in Archaeology, (2 or 4 Credits)| Separate courses devoted to specialized topics in archaeology.
ARCH565,Statecraft and International Relations in the Ancient Near East, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 365.
ARCH569,Religion of Israel and ANE, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 369.
ARCH594,Seminar: Current Issues, (2 Credits)| A seminar devoted to exploring the current issues in Near Eastern archaeology that relate to biblical studies, especially those touching on historiography, historicity, social and cultural backgrounds, methodology, and faith.
ARCH695,Independent Study, (2 or 4 Credits)| Independent Study
ART101,Art Survey, (2 Credits)| Critical survey of the visual arts that equips students to navigate their visual age. Depending on the instructor, this course could be taught with a historical or thematical/material focus, but all versions of Art Survey entail an investigation into visual modes of thought with examples from history and the present. Art majors are expected to take ART 251 and 351 (studio art and art history concentrations) or ART 352 (community art concentration) in place of this course. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART102,Issues In Art, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the visual arts approached thematically. Only one section of ART 101, 102, or 302 may be taken for credit towards graduation requirements.
ART211,Painting I, (3 Credits)| Introduction to Painting: concepts and techniques. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART213,Printmaking I, (3 Credits)| Studio in making prints: relief printing, intaglio, and lithography. Study of skills and techniques, and appreciation of the aesthetic qualities of the print.
ART216,Philosophy Of Art, (2 Credits)| See PHIL 216.
ART221,Taking Pictures, (3 Credits)| A basic introduction to photography using simple digital cameras. Students will make pictures in response to visual images and art objects from art history and different cultural contexts. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART231,Sculpture I, (3 Credits)| A basic introduction to sculptural practice, concepts and techniques. Students create work in response to historical and contemporary artworks and consider a theological approach to the creative process. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART232,Drawing I, (3 Credits)| Exercises in basic drawing techniques using various media. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART233,Creativity & Design, (3 Credits)| An exploration of the creative process and basic principles of visual organization.
ART234,Digital Studio, (3 Credits)| An introduction to the language and technology of digital media that combines history, theory, and practice to explore the intersection of art and technology.
ART241,Sophomore Cornerstone, (2 Credits)| A discussion of art and artists, theological views of artistry, and art theory in the 20th and 21st centuries. These are examined in light of various traditional Christian views of the relationship of the Christian person to culture. We explore how theological and cultural attitudes, along with artistic theories and methods, can shape the form and direction of artistic work. Each student is encouraged to evaluate and develop his/her own method or response to God, the created world, and cultural realities, through artistic means.
ART251,History of Art & Architecture I (Ancient – c, 1700), (4 Credits)| Introduction to select periods of art and architecture from cave paintings to the cusp of the modern era (c. 1700), including Ziggurats, Pyramids, Israelite visual culture, Greek and Roman art, Byzantine icons and Gothic Cathedrals, the art of the Renaissance, Reformation and Baroque, with special attention given to the way Non-Western artistic traditions interact with dominant European visual culture. Enrollment priority will be given to Art Majors. Taking ART 351 immediately after this course is recommended (but not required). Offered every Fall semester.
ART293,Mentoring Seminar, (1 to 4 Credits)| Faculty and student collaboration on a project of mutual interest. Limited enrollment – faculty approval. May be repeated.
ART302,The Understanding of Art, (2 Credits)| The origin and development of the fine arts; the functional and aesthetic qualities of art. Only one section of ART 101, 102, or 302 may be taken for credit towards graduation requirements. For transfer and upper division students. Meets art portion of the Literature and the Arts cluster legacy general education requirement.
ART312,Film & Darkroom Photography, (3 Credits)| Basic studies in design and composition, camera operation, technical mastery of black and white film and paper, darkroom procedures. Emphasis on aesthetic and perceptual awareness, visual literacy, proficiency in the use of analog photographic materials and processes. Study of major works and significant photographers. Cameras and basic equipment available for check-out.
ART313,Printmaking II, (3 Credits)| Advanced study developing skills and techniques in one printing medium. Prerequisite: ART 213.
ART316,Ceramics I, (3 Credits)| A general introduction to ceramics through hand-building techniques with an emphasis on the vessel as a vehicle to explore issues in contemporary art. Introduction to the technical skills, history, and thought process of working with clay. Historic and contemporary approaches to ceramics are considered as means to develop a personal approach to the material.
ART318,Graphic Design I, (3 Credits)| Typography; Students will engage the fundamental principles of design in structured and experimental ways. There will be primary focus on typography: its history, organization, and the relationship between the expressive quality of form and the communication of meaning. We will work both with our hands and also in the digital environment; exploring the basic type and layout capabilities the computer affords (Adobe Illustrator and InDesign).
ART319,Documentary Photography, (3 Credits)| Foundation course using photography as a creative tool for field work and cross-cultural applications. Exploration of contemporary theory and practices.
ART321,Wood Fired Ceramics, (3 Credits)| A basic introduction to ceramic practice with particular focus on the history and practice of wood-kiln firing. Taught at HoneyRock. Room and board fee is required. Transportation is not provided. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART323,Figure Drawing, (3 Credits)| Life drawing. Prerequisite: ART 232.
ART324,Digital Photography II, (3 Credits)| Continuation of ART 383. Photography explored creatively, informed by contemporary artistic concepts and methods. Students may explore documentary, artistic, and/or commercial practices, studio portrait lighting, animated 'moving' images, entrepreneurial possibilities. Prerequisite: ART 319 or 383 or consent of instructor.
ART325,Cinema, (4 Credits)| A study of the cinematic arts from its inception to current times. The focus will be on the critical film theory and aesthetic, technological, historical progression of the world cinema.
ART326,Digital Filmmaking I, (3 Credits)| Digital Filmmaking shows the trace of motion picture history as well as the trajectory of future cinema. Students confront issues of style and meaning while working on visual expression of radical imagination.
ART327,Painting II, (3 Credits)| An introduction to historical resources and theoretical underpinnings for the development of abstract paintings. Prerequisite: ART 211 or consent of instructor.
ART328,Advanced Digital Studio, (3 Credits)| (Formerly Web Site Design); Students will create and design content for the digital and web environment. Projects will be at times linear/narrative, but also interactive and engaging new and open source applications. Prerequisite: ART 318 or consent of instructor
ART329,Community Art, (3 Credits)| History and theories of community-based public art. Practical experience researching and initiating a community-based public art project. Legacy diversity designation.
ART332,Graphic Design II, (3 Credits)| Visual Systems; Students will integrate typography and imagery in more complex systems and programs, with additional focus on Information design, publication design, and an introduction to motion sequences. We will also read and discuss writings of historical significance to the field. Prerequisite: ART 318.
ART336,Ceramics II, (3 Credits)| Continuation of skills and issues introduced in Ceramics I, with emphasis placed on the potter’s wheel. Introduction to glaze chemistry, with the goal of developing a personal palette of glazes. Prerequisite: ART 316.
ART339,Sculpture II, (3 Credits)| Continuation of Sculpture I. Exploration of more contemporary issues in sculpture. Prerequisite: ART 231.
ART345,Archaeology of Classical World, (2 Credits)| See ARCH 345.
ART351,History of Art & Architecture II (c, 1700 - present), (4 Credits)| This course offers an introduction to art and architecture from the eighteenth to the twenty-first centuries primarily in Europe and North America, with special attention given to the city of Chicago and diverse American artistic voices. Movements explored include Rococo, Neo-Classicism, Romanticism, Realism, Medieval revivals, Impressionism, Modernism, Pop, Conceptual, and especially the art of minority communities. Enrollment priority will be given to Art majors. Taking ART 251 immediately before this course is recommended. Offered every Spring semester. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART352,Medieval & Byzantine Art, (4 Credits)| Exploration of the visual theology of Early Christian art and architecture, following its development in Constantinople alongside the Celtic and Carolingian culture of the medieval West, and concluding in the artistic maturity of both these civilizations: Romanesque and Gothic in the West and Byzantine art in the East. Alternate years in Fall semester. Enrollment priority given to Art History majors. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART353,Renaissance and Reformation Art, (4 Credits)| Exploration of art and architecture from the fourteenth to the sixteenth centuries, in Late Byzantine, Italian and Northern European contexts, including the impact of Protestantism. Artists examined include Cimabue, Giotto, Duccio, Masaccio, Fra Angelico, Raphael, Michelangelo, Bellini, Titian, Van Eyck, Van der Weyden, Dürer, Cranach, Holbein, Bruegel, and many others. Special attention is given to the way the Protestant Reformation conflicted with and was propagated by artistic production. Alternate years in Spring semester. Enrollment priority given to Art History majors. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAV.
ART375,Studies in Studio Art, (2 or 3 Credits)| Selected specialized areas of studio art as announced.
ART381,New Media Art & Criticism, (3 Credits)| A workshop exploring the aesthetics of new screen media and digital interfaces. Assignments and projects will explore digital convergence, digital interactivity, digital spaces, digital temporalities, and digital narratives. Prequisite: ART 318 or 326 or 383 or 383. Also, by consent of instructor.
ART382,Art & Technology, (3 Credits)| A workshop exploring some of the issues at the interface between the creative process and the possibilities offered by technological efficiencies. The course will engage a variety of theoretical models while students complete projects with digital video.
ART383,Digital Photography I, (3 Credits)| Basic studies in design and composition, camera operation, applicable technologies, visual literacy. Introduction to Adobe Lightroom, Photoshop, and related software. Emphasis on developing creative personal practices informed by art history and contemporary visual culture. Study of relevant works and significant artists. Cameras and basic equipment available for check-out.
ART423,Advanced Drawing, (3 Credits)| Advanced studies in drawing. Prerequisite: ART 323.
ART425,Advanced Studio III, (3 Credits)| Advanced students (level #3 studios) in all media and studio disciplines meet together to define, evaluate, and encourage personal artistic development. Class sessions center on discussion of student projects. Discussion is organized around seminal readings that challenge status quo assumptions, provoke creative art-making, and inspire commitment to ongoing artistic explorations.
ART426,Digital Filmmaking II, (3 Credits)| Advanced studies in digital filmmaking.
ART429,Community Art II, (3 Credits)| A course on the streets of Chicago in which we survey twenty community arts organizations across the city. Site visits and case studies are the sole contents of the course. Intended for Art majors with a concentration in Community Art in the spring semester of their junior year. Prerequisite: ART 329.
ART471,Studies in Art History, (4 Credits)| In-depth study of some aspect of art history or art historical methodology. Not offered at this time. Alternate years.
ART491,Art History Capstone, (2 Credits)| Drawing on their entire liberal arts education, students will develop an expansive understanding of the liberal arts, asking how art history fits into it, or how it does not, including vocational reflections. A behind the scenes tour of the history of the discipline will culminate in a Tour de Tout (tour of everything) public tour of the architecture of Chicago and the entire collection of the Art Institute, led by students and open to the general public.
ART492,Internship: Community Art Capstone, (3 Credits)| An internship is an agreement to work within an arts-based organization in a role as prescribed by the organization. Internship service may be paid or unpaid, is chosen at students' discretion, but subjected entirely to advisor/department approval. Advisor will guide students through internship selection process. Internships are a launch platform for community art senior projects and should be chosen in regards to students' vocational goals. Prerequisite: ART 329, junior standing, 12 hours logged in major.
ART493,Mentoring Seminar, (1 to 4 Credits)| Faculty and student collaboration on a project of mutual interest. Limited enrollment – faculty approval needed. May be repeated. Junior or Senior standing required.
ART494,Senior Capstone, (2 Credits)| 494-1. (Section 1) Senior Capstone for Art History Concentration. Exploration of the methodology of art history and the development of the discipline, including Classical precedents, Byzantine icon theology, Renaissance Neo-Platonism, German developments, Hegel, Marx, Feminism, Deconstruction and the religious turn. Alternate years in the Fall only.; 494-2. (Section 2) Senior Capstone for Community Art Concentration. Typically offered in the Fall only. Capstone for legacy gen ed students.; 494-3 (Section 3) Senior Capstone for Studio Art Concentration. Typically offered in the Fall only. In this course, students recollect who they are as artists and what they are making. They develop a personal and artistic mission and goals, design and construct a physical portfolio object, and create other appropriate presences including resume, business card, website, e-book, etc. In addition, there will be discussions of select readings, technical workshops, and guest presenters.
ART495,Independent Projects, (1 to 4 Credits)| Independent work in a selected field of art. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
ART496,Internship, (2 to 8 Credits)| Art Department approval. Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with Art major. (2, 4, or 8 credits)
ART497,Exhibition Practicum, (2 Credits)| Group practicum focused on the meaning, development, preparation, and production of senior show exhibitions. To be taken during spring semester of senior year. Prerequisite: successful participation in the Junior Critique process.
ART498,Honors Tutorial, (2 to 4 Credits)| Reading and research on an art historical topic of their choosing. Students will work with professor to conceive a project and solicit two outside readers who are professors from other departments with related expertise. Prerequisites: An A in all upper level art history courses taken, admission to Department Honors program, senior standing.
ART499,Honors Thesis, (2 to 4 Credits)| Preparation of senior honors thesis. Not applicable to major requirements. Prerequisite: ART 498.
ASTR304,Global History of Cosmology, (4 Credits)| Study of the historical development of cosmology in ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, India, Greece, Asia, and the Americas through contemporary developments. Cultural and religious interactions with developments in cosmology are emphasized. Prerequisite: a Scientific Practice (SP) course.
ASTR305,Astronomy, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the study of the universe. Topics include the solar system, the formation and evolution of stars and the structure, evolution and origin of the universe. Special attention will be given to the social, historical, philosophical and theological context of astronomical discoveries and controversies.
BITH211,Old Testament Literature and Interpretation, (4 Credits)| Equips students to understand the Old Testament as literature in its ancient historical context and to relate the message of the Old Testament to the contemporary world. Courses in this area will introduce students to the historical and geographical setting, cultural context, and transmission of the Old Testament. Courses will also facilitate direct engagement with the OT book-by-book, with special emphasis given to questions of genre, literary structure, and theology. This course will enable students to describe and evaluate approaches to biblical interpretation, and will encourage students to embrace the teaching of the OT as part of the Christian Bible.
BITH213,New Testament Literature and Interpretation, (4 Credits)| An overview of the New Testament, tracing its teaching with respect to historical background and literary character.
BITH221,Old Testament Literature in Three Traditions, (4 Credits)| An overview of the redemptive narrative of the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament emphasizing its message and themes with respect to historical background and literary character, and exploring its place in the three monotheistic religions tracing their origins to Abraham—Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Meets General Education requirement in Old Testament. Legacy diversity designation.
BITH311,Archaeology of Biblical Lands, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 366.
BITH312,Old Testament in the Holy Lands, (4 Credits)| A study of the Old Testament integrated with field studies designed to introduce the student to the historical, geographical, and cultural settings of the Old Testament in locations where the events recorded occurred.
BITH315,Christian Thought, (4 Credits)| An investigation into the basic beliefs of the Christian faith. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 211; and BITH 213 or ARCH 213 or BITH 317. Philosophy majors are encouraged to take BITH 374 instead of this course.
BITH317,The New Testament in the Holy Lands, (4 Credits)| A study of the New Testament integrated with field studies designed to introduce the student to the historical, geographical, cultural, and religious settings of the New Testament in locations where the events recorded occured and were composed. This is a Wheaton in the Holy Lands/Shared Core course.
BITH318,Christian Theology in the Holy Lands, (4 Credits)| An exploration of the core beliefs of the Christian faith with special emphasis on the role of the ancient church in its historical contexts in the development of Christian thought and practice. This is a Wheaton in the Holy Lands/Shared Core Course. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or ARCH 211 or BITH 221; and BITH 213 or ARCH 213. Corequisite: BITH 317.
BITH319,Colonialism and Redemption: Native American Culture and Theology from 1492 to Wounded Knee, (2 Credits)| Legacy diversity designation. See ANTH 319.
BITH322,Theology and the Arts, (4 Credits)| This course explores the relationship between Christian theology and the arts in order to cultivate a theological vision for the arts that considers both how the particular claims of the Christian faith inform our understanding of the arts and how the arts contribute to the shaping of our faith. Topics will include the arts in Scripture, church history, and theological reflection. Questions to be considered include the relationship between divine creation and human creativity, how the incarnation of Christ transforms our understanding of artistic activity, and how humanity may be inspired to glorify God through the arts. Depending upon the particular version of the course, examples of the arts to be assessed include visual art, music, theater, film, dance, sculpture, and architecture.
BITH323,Literature of the Bible, (4 Credits)| See ENGL 373.
BITH325,Biblical Interpretation and Hermeneutics, (4 Credits)| A survey of hermeneutical theory discussing past and current views of how author, text, reader, and context contribute to the communication of textual meaning. These insights will be applied to the Bible, giving the student an interpretive strategy for exegeting the biblical text and appropriating it for the contemporary church, as well as an approach to synthesizing one's interpretive work in formulating biblical-theological themes. Basic approaches for doing biblical theology and theological interpretation will be summarized and illustrated. The course is open to non-majors and is a prerequisite for all 400 level Biblical Studies courses. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or BITH 221 or BITH 312 or ARCH 211 or BITH 213 or BITH 317 or ARCH 213.
BITH326,Biblical Theology of Worship, (2 Credits)| An examination of worship in the Bible, both Old and New Testaments with a view to developing a theology of worship that is consistent with the teachings of Scripture. Special attention will be paid to the appropriate application of this theology for the church today. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 211 or BITH 213 or BITH 317 or ARCH 213.
BITH327,Reading Scripture with the Church Fathers, (2 Credits)| A study of the reception, transmission, and interpretation of Scripture within the early church (2nd to 6th centuries). Emphasis will be placed on the historical context of patristic exegesis, the relationship between scripture and tradition, and questions of hermeneutics. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 213; or BITH 213 or ARCH 213 or BITH 317.
BITH332,Ruth & Esther, (4 Credits)| A detailed study of the books of Ruth and Esther, giving special attention to historical background, literary analysis, theological emphases, ancient and traditional Jewish and Christian interpretations, recent ideological interpretations, and contemporary application. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or 221, or ARCH 211. This course counts towards the Gender Studies Certificate Program.
BITH333,Historical Geography and Context in the Holy Lands, (4 Credits)| Surveys the geographical, historical, religious and archaeological material of biblical Israel and Second Temple Judaism as well as the earliest Christian communities in the Greco-Roman world. Classroom lectures are supplemented by regional studies with overnight field studies, on-site lectures and relevant preparation (map work, biblical readings, etc.). Attention is given to (1) key OT and NT historical events and their geographical location, especially in Jerusalem, Galilee, the Shephelah, Jordan Valley, Negev, and the Dead Sea region, and (2) key NT historical events and their geographical location, especially in Italy (Rome), Greece (e.g., Philippi, Delphi, Thessalonica, Corinth, Athens), and modern Turkey (e.g., Ephesus, Istanbul, Pergamum, Smyrna, Laodicea). Su only.
BITH334,Historical Geography, (2 Credits)| A study of selected biblical episodes which are enriched when understood in the context of Near Eastern history and Palestinian geography. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 211.
BITH337,Early Christian Integration Seminar, (2 Credits)| A study of early Christianity as it relates to contemporary issues. This course is required for the Certificate in Early Christian Studies. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH338,Genesis 1-11, (2 Credits)| A study of the foundational chapters for the Old and New Testaments. The central themes of creation, God, humanity, the fall, redemption, judgment, and covenant will be investigated in detail. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or 221, or ARCH 211.
BITH339,Topics in Perennial Theological Questions, (4 Credits)| This course is an in-depth philosophical study of a particular doctrine, figure, or topic. This course may be repeated for different topics.
BITH341,Exodus, (2 Credits)| The exodus event is as central to OT theology as the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ to NT theology. The historical and theological implications of this book will be examined, with special emphasis given to the covenant between God and Israel. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or 221, or ARCH 211.
BITH342,Majority World Theology, (4 Credits)| Readings and discussions on the task of biblical interpretation and theological reflection in the context of World Christianity. The course will focus on emerging theological trends in one region, such as Latin America, but will also survey contemporary developments in other regions: Africa, Asia and Latin America. The topics covered will include Majority World hermeneutics, comparative analysis with Western biblical and theological traditions, and an introduction to parallel trends in North America like Latino/a, African American, Asian American, or Native American Christian theologies. Prerequisites: BITH 211 and 213 or BITH 315 or 318 or 374.
BITH343,The Old Testament in its Cultural Environment, (2 Credits)| An introduction to background and comparative studies in order to understand the impact that the literature and thinking of the ancient world had on the Israelites and on biblical literature. The course will focus on methodology and will consider both similarities and differences that emerge as the cultures and literatures are compared. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 211.
BITH344,The Psalms: Songs of Israel and the Church, (2 Credits)| A study of the book of Psalms in light of both the type and content of individual psalms and the organization of the Psalter as a book in the social and cultural life of Israel. Attention will be given to how the book of Psalms guides individuals and communities in their worship of God, while also imparting its own theological methods for God's people. Prerequisite: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 211.
BITH345,Life of David, (2 Credits)| A study of the life and thought of David as found in the Books of Samuel and Psalms with an emphasis on ‘spiritual theology.’ Prerequisite: ARCH 211 or BITH 211 or BITH 221 or BITH 312.
BITH349,Old Testament Topics, (2 or 4 Credits)| Study of an Old Testament portion or theme. Course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisite:
BITH351,Jesus Of Nazareth, (4 Credits)| A thorough study of Jesus' life and teaching. Primary attention will be given to reconstructing the first-century historical and cultural setting of Judaism that shaped Jesus' message. Additional emphasis on developments within current Jesus research and assessment of the results of critical scholarship. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH352,Paul Of Tarsus, (2 or 4 Credits)| A study of the life and thought of Paul as found in the book of Acts and in Paul's New Testament letters. The course will synthesize the major categories of Pauline thought and emphasize their value for faith today. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH354,Women in the World of the NT, (2 Credits)| This course will examine women’s lives and the concept of female in the New Testament and the wider Greco-Roman world, including Second Temple Judaism, by studying the biblical text, literary sources and archaeological evidence. This course will explore New Testament women’s participation in and contributions to the Christian story in the first century, and discuss women’s participation in leadership in the church today. General pictures of women’s lives in Judaism and the Greco-Roman world will supplement the portrait of early Christian women. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213. Legacy diversity designation.
BITH355,Theology of the Promised Land, (2 Credits)| An integrative course studying the theological motif of the Promised Land in the Bible. This course will explore the theology of the Land as interpreted within Judaism and Christianity over the last two millennia. Prerequisites: Old Testament Literature (BITH 211 or BITH 221) and New Testament Literature (BITH 213).
BITH356,I Corinthians, (2 or 4 Credits)| A section-by-section survey of 1 Corinthians dealing with the issues of the nature of the Church, Christian behavior and social responsibility, sexuality, marriage and divorce, Christian worship, the spiritual gifts, and the resurrection. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH358,Acts of the Apostles, (2 or 4 Credits)| A study of the Book of Acts focused on the geographic and ethnic spread of the gospel, the birth and development of the apostolic church, the gospel's relationship to the Jewish and wider Greco-Roman social worlds, and the theology of Acts. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317 or ARCH 213.
BITH359,New Testament Topics, (2 or 4 Credits)| Study of a New Testament portion or theme. Course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH361,Advanced Koine Reading, (2 or 4 Credits)| See crosslist GREK 334, 335, 336.
BITH362,James, (2 Credits)| An exposition of the text of the Epistle of James, focusing on the church situations that prompted the teaching of the various themes it contains, and their correlation to corresponding New Testament motifs. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH363,The Letter to the Romans, (4 Credits)| A close analysis of Paul's theological argument in the book of Romans with special attention to themes that integrate broadly with the humanities. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH364,Peter And Jude, (2 Credits)| Exercise in the interpretation of letter genre, by application to portions of 1 Peter, 2 Peter, and Jude. Students use a prescribed method and scholarly resources for productive class discussions. Attention is given to sociological exegesis. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH365,Prison Epistles, (2 or 4 Credits)| Analysis of Colossians, Ephesians, Philippians, and Philemon, all written while the author was in chains. Attention will focus on the light these letters throw on Paul's life and thought, as well as on the abiding challenge of their message. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH366,New Testament Topics in Historical Perspectives, (4 Credits)| The writings of the New Testaments are principle sources for understanding the early history of Christianity. Their authors interacted with the historical and cultural developments within first century Roman societies and the first readers interpreted these writings within the same historical matrix. This course will examine select New Testament writings within first century Mediterranean history and explore their place within wider cultural discussions on historiography during the period. Reading from Greek and Latin literature will be included. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH367,Jerusalem the Holy City, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 367.
BITH368,The Book of Revelation, (2 Credits)| A chapter-by-chapter analysis of the Book of Revelation with consideration of the major themes, apocalyptic symbolism, theology, prophetic character of the book, and relevance to Christian faith and discipleship. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317, or ARCH 213.
BITH369,Religions of Israel and the Ancient Near East, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 369.
BITH371,Early Christianity: From Rome to Byzantium, (4 Credits)| A history of Christianity from the first century to the eleventh century. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or BITH 221 or ARCH 211; and BITH 213 or ARCH 213 or BITH 317.
BITH372,Historical Theology, (4 Credits)| Historical survey of people and movements which have shaped the faith of the Christian church from post-biblical times to the present. The course is open to non-majors but is not a substitute for BITH 315.
BITH373,Marriage Sex and Family in the Christian Tradition, (4 Credits)| An examination of marriage, sexuality, and the family in the Christian tradition in light of scripture, doctrine, and church history. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH374,Systematic Theology, (4 Credits)| A critical investigation of Christian doctrine. The course is open only to Biblical and Theological Studies and Philosophy majors. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 211; and BITH 213 or ARCH 213 or BITH 317.
BITH375,Christian Ethics, (4 Credits)| An investigation into Christian ethical traditions, its biblical and theological dimensions, the development of Christian character, and the task of bringing Christian convictions to bear on ethical issues. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH376,Theologies of Transformation, (4 Credits)| An investigation into the basic beliefs of the Christian faith, with special attention to their implications in the urban context, and the relationship between church and world. Fulfills the Christian Theology general education requirement. Only offered as part of Wheaton in Chicago. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 211; and BITH 213 or ARCH 213 or BITH 317.
BITH377,Topics in Christian Thought, (2 Credits)| This course is an in-depth treatment of some theological category (doctrine, figure or topic) or the application of Christian thought to contemporary issues. This course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH379,Spiritual Theology: Knowing and Experiencing God, (4 Credits)| See C E 341.
BITH381,Topics in Spiritual Classics, (2 Credits)| This course is an in-depth study of one or more spiritual classics from the Christian tradition. The text(s) will vary according to instructor's choice. May be repeated for different topics.
BITH382,Church, (2 Credits)| A study of the doctrine of the church, attending to traditional and contemporary debates and formulations. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH383,Gender and Theology, (2 Credits)| A theological examination of the representation of women and gender in Christianity. Attention is given to the historical and cultural contexts of the first century and contemporary period. Theological, historical, literary, exegetical, and feminist methods are variously employed. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376. Legacy diversity designation
BITH384,Political Theology, (4 Credits)| A study of the theological basis for Christian public engagement, attending to the role of the state, responses to sociopolitical oppression, and the political dimensions of salvation. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH385,Triune God, (4 Credits)| An overview of the doctrine of God, with particular attention to the doctrine of the Trinity. Both traditional formulations and contemporary contributions will be discussed. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH388,Person and Work of Christ, (4 Credits)| A study of the doctrines of Christ and salvation, with attention to connections between the two. Topics include classic debates and formulations in church history and systematic theology. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH389,Holy Spirit and Last Things, (4 Credits)| A study of pneumatology and eschatology, including biblical, historical, doctrinal, and hermeneutical approaches to the doctrines. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH392,Scripture, (2 Credits)| A study of the doctrine of Scripture, with attention to evangelical perspectives on the doctrine. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH393,Topics in Christian Thought, (4 Credits)| This course is an in-depth treatment of some theological category (doctrine, figure, or topic) or the application of Christian thought to contemporary issues. This course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH394,Topics in Christian History, (4 Credits)| This course is an in-depth study of some phenomenon (figure, event, or time period) from the Christian past. This course may be repeated for different topics.
BITH396,Roman Catholic Theology, (4 Credits)| An introduction to Roman Catholic theology and practice. The course will also attend to points of similarity and difference between Roman Catholic and Protestant theology. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH398,Eastern Orthodox Theology, (4 Credits)| An introduction to Eastern Orthodox theology and practice. The course will also attend to points of similarity and difference between Eastern Orthodox and Protestant theology. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH417,New Testament and Context in the Holy Lands, (4 Credits)| The study of the New Testament in the geographical, historical, religious, and archaeological context of Israel at the time of Christ and the Greco-Roman world of Paul and the early church. Classroom lectures are supplemented by relevant preparation work (mapping, biblical and supplemental readings, etc.) and by regional on-site lectures in Israel (e.g. Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Samaria, Galilee), Greece (e.g., Philippi, Delphi, Thessalonica, Corinth, Athens, Patmos), modern Turkey (e.g. Ephesus, Istanbul, Pergamum, Smyrna, Laodicea), and Rome. *When travel to any site is not an option due to security issues, we will adjust our schedules accordingly. Prerequisites, BITH 211, 213
BITH418,Christian Theology in Context in the Holy Lands, (4 Credits)| The study of the Christian theology in the geographical, historical, religious, and archaeological context of Israel at the time of Christ and the Greco-Roman world of Paul and the early church. Classroom lectures are supplemented by relevant preparation work (mapping, biblical and supplemental readings, etc.) and by regional on-site lectures, circumstances permitting, in Israel (e.g. Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Samaria, Galilee), Greece (e.g., Philippi, Delphi, Thessalonica, Corinth, Athens, Patmos), modern Turkey (e.g. Ephesus, Istanbul, Pergamum, Smyrna, Laodicea), and Rome. *When travel to any site is not an option due to security issues, we will adjust our schedules accordingly. Prerequisite BITH 315
BITH431,Old Testament Criticism, (2 Credits)| A study of the history, method, and results of modern historical-critical approaches to the Old Testament literature. Attention will also be given to a critical assessment of these developments from an evangelical perspective. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or 221, or ARCH 211, and BITH 325.
BITH433,Jeremiah, (2 or 4 Credits)| A study of the literary content, theological message and contemporary relevance of the Book of Jeremiah against the background of Jeremiah's historical setting. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or 221, or ARCH 211, and BITH 325.
BITH434,Minor Prophets, (2 Credits)| A literary, historical and theological analysis of the Minor Prophets with special attention to contemporary application and connections with the liberal arts. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or 221, or ARCH 211, and BITH 325.
BITH438,Wisdom Literature, (2 Credits)| A selection from the Old Testament wisdom books, Job, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes. The apocryphal books of Jesus ben Sirach and the Wisdom of Solomon may also be read and studied in relation to canonical wisdom. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or 221, or ARCH 211, and BITH 325.
BITH443,Hebrew Exegesis, (2 or 4 Credits)| Exegesis of books or selected portions of larger books of the Hebrew Old Testament. The focus of the course is to interpret the Hebrew text. The ability to translate the Hebrew text and analyze its syntactical structures is assumed because of the prerequisite. Course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or 221 or ARCH 211, BITH 325, and HEBR 401.
BITH449,Old Testament Topics, (2 or 4 Credits)| Study of an Old Testament portion or theme. Course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisites: BITH 211 or BITH 221 or ARCH 211 or ARCH 312 and BITH 325.
BITH451,Greek Exegesis, (2 or 4 Credits)| Exegesis of books or selected portions of larger books of the Greek New Testament. Capability of translation is assumed because of the prerequisite. The purpose of the course is not to teach Greek grammar but to interpret the New Testament from the Greek text. Course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisites: BITH 213 or 214, or ARCH 213, BITH 325, and completion of GREK 201.
BITH452,New Testament Criticism, (2 Credits)| A study of the history, method, and results of modern historical-critical approaches to the New Testament literature. Attention will also be given to a critical assessment of these developments from an evangelical perspective. Prerequisites: BITH 213 or 317 or ARCH 213, and BITH 325.
BITH454,Mark, (2 Credits)| A study of the second gospel focusing on Mark's portrait of Jesus as the catalyst of the Kingdom and as suffering servant. Attention will be given to the relationship between literary forms and religious function in the writing of the gospel. Prerequisites: BITH 213 or ARCH 213, and BITH 325.
BITH457,John, (4 Credits)| A comprehensive study of John’s gospel. Its insights into personal spirituality, both in the first century and today, will be emphasized in the context of current critical Johannine scholarship. Prerequisites: BITH 213 or 317 or ARCH 213 and BITH 325.
BITH458,Acts of the Apostles, (4 Credits)| A study of the Book of Acts focused on the geographic and ethnic spread of the gospel, the birth and development of the apostolic church, the gospel's relationship to the Jewish and wider Greco-Roman social worlds, and the theology of Acts. Prerequisite: BITH 213 or 317 or ARCH 213, and BITH 325.
BITH462,Pastoral Epistles, (2 Credits)| Careful investigation of 1 and 2 Timothy and Titus. Detailed textual analysis will lead to better understanding of the joys and struggles of Christian leadership under Paul's direction. Social roles and cultural issues affecting the Church will receive special attention. Prerequisites: BITH 213 or 317 or ARCH 213, and BITH 325.
BITH469,New Testament Topics, (2 or 4 Credits)| Study of a New Testament portion or theme. Course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisites: BITH 213 or BITH 317 or ARCH 213, and BITH 325.
BITH482,Advanced Topics in Christian Thought, (4 Credits)| This course is an in-depth treatment of some theological category (doctrine, figure, or topic) or the application of Christian thought to contemporary issues. This course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH483,Augustine, (4 Credits)| A critical analysis of Augustine’s theology in historical context. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH484,Thomas Aquinas, (4 Credits)| A critical analysis of Thomas Aquinas' theology in historical context. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH485,Martin Luther, (4 Credits)| A critical analysis of Martin Luther's theology in historical context. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH486,John Calvin, (4 Credits)| A critical analysis of John Calvin's theology in historical context.Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH488,Karl Barth, (4 Credits)| A critical analysis of Karl Barth's theology in historical context.Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH489,Advanced Topics in Christian Thought, (2 Credits)| This course is an in-depth treatment of some theological category (doctrine, figure, or topic) or the application of Christian thought to contemporary issues. This course may be repeated for different topics. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374 or 376.
BITH491,Early Christianity Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| An advanced seminar for students in the Certificate for Early Christian Studies to be taken during their senior year. This course is required for the Certificate in Early Christian Studies. Prerequisite: BITH 315, 318, 372, 374, or 376.
BITH494,Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| An integrative capstone seminar for Biblical and Theological Studies majors to be taken during their senior year. Prerequisites: BITH 325, BITH 374.
BITH495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Independent study by qualified students in a special category or topic not offered in a regular course.
BITH496,Internship, (1 to 4 Credits)| Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with BITH major.
BITH499,Honors Thesis, (2 or 4 Credits)| By application only.
BITH502,Hebrew, (4 Credits)| See HEBR 302.
BITH503,Language Study I, (2 or 4 Credits)| Graduate-level study of an ancient or modern language in conjunction with a one semester or advanced language course taught at Wheaton College. Requires advisor’s approval and permission of instructor.
BITH504,Language Study II, (2 or 4 Credits)| Graduate-level study of an ancient or modern language in conjunction with a second semester language course taught at Wheaton College. Requires advisor’s approval and permission of instructor.
BITH505,Language Study III, (2 or 4 Credits)| Graduate-level study of an ancient or modern language in conjunction with a one semester or advanced language course taught at Wheaton College. Requires advisor’s approval and permission of instructor.
BITH506,Language Study II, (0 Credits)| Building on BITH 505/GERM 372, this course meets weekly during the subsequent semester for an intensive workshop in reading/translating academic prose (primary sources; scholarly books and articles), with a particular focus on readings in theological disciplines and the humanities. Emphasis on textual analysis, review and expansion of key structures, management of linguistic challenges, and development of global reading skills. Prerequisite: BITH 505/GERM 372 or the equivalent.
BITH508,Intro to Hebrew Exegesis, (4 Credits)| Hebrew language course designed for MA Biblical Exegesis students. Course will continue to develop student language acquisition through review of grammar and syntax, and through intensive reading of selected biblical texts. Introduction will be given to textual criticism, lexical semantics, and the Masoretic text. Prerequisites: HEBR 301 and HEBR 302.
BITH509,Introduction to Greek Exegesis, (4 Credits)| Greek language course designed for MA Biblical Exegesis students. Course will continue to develop student language acquisition through review of grammar and syntax, and through intensive reading of selected biblical texts. Introduction will be given to textual criticism, lexical semantics, and modern editions of the Greek NT. Prerequisites: GREK 101 and GREK 102; or the equivalent.
BITH517,Studies in Biblical Lands, (4 Credits)| A study of cultural, historical, geographical, and theological dimensions of the Old Testament, New Testament, and the Church through classroom lecture and travel to Israel, Greece, Turkey, and Rome. In addition, through contact with leaders and communities of non-western churches, Wheaton in the Holy Lands engages students with issues of the theological development of the Church down through the centuries. Summer only.
BITH518,Studies in Biblical Lands, (4 Credits)| A study of cultural, historical, geographical, and theological dimensions of the Old Testament, New Testament, and the Church through classroom lecture and travel to Israel, Greece, Turkey, and Rome. In addition, through contact with leaders and communities of non-western churches, Wheaton in the Holy Lands engages students with issues of the theological development of the Church down through the centuries. Summer only.
BITH521,Theology Of Education, (2 Credits)| An examination of fundamental theological issues underlying education, including the relationship of revelation to other disciplines, the Christian conception of persons and knowing, and the relationship of the Church to culture. Required for the Master of Arts in Teaching degree.
BITH524,Intro to Hermeneutics, (2 Credits)| A theoretical complement to the methodology courses of BITH 542 and BITH 531. This course situates grammatical-historical biblical exegesis in a Christian hermeneutic, with a view to understanding the supporting rationale, life habits, and the aims of our exegetical practices within our life as God’s people. Topics include: the history of hermeneutics; historical and theological approaches to interpretation; World Christian Perspectives; the importance and relations of authors, texts, readers, and divine agency; translation in word and life. This course is a prerequisite for BITH 532, BITH 635, and BITH 646 and a co-requisite for BITH 542 (Old Testament Hermeneutics) and BITH 531 (New Testament Hermeneutics).
BITH525,Biblical Theology, (4 Credits)| A study of the major theological themes within the Old and New Testaments, based upon the biblical text and the writings of major biblical theologians. The course will also consider the historical development and interrelationship of these themes throughout the successive periods of biblical history.
BITH526,Biblical Theology of Worship, (2 Credits)| See BITH 326.
BITH528,Introduction to New Testament Exegesis, (2 Credits)| A practical hermeneutics course, orienting students to the principles and praxis of New Testament grammatical-historical exegesis. Focusing on selected Greek texts chosen from various genres, attention will be given to the literary and rhetorical strategies employed by biblical authors to achieve their intended goals. Particular issues to be addressed include textual criticism, lexical and grammatical analysis, compositional style and genre and the broader canonical and historical contexts. This course is a prerequisite for BITH 646 and BITH 532. Prerequisite: Greek language competency.
BITH531,New Testament Hermeneutics, (2 Credits)| This course will introduce those specific principles, resources, and skills that are necessary for interpreting New Testament texts that are not dependent on a mastery of the biblical languages. Primary attention will be given to genre analysis, socio-cultural worldview, biblical criticism (including issues of authorship and date of composition for individual books), the significance of the history of interpretation and the role of theology in informing interpretation. The focus throughout will be on building methods useful for exegeting the text. Prerequisite: BITH 524 Introduction to Hermeneutics.
BITH532,Greek Exegesis in the Septuagint, (2 or 4 Credits)| Introduces the Greek Old Testament and modern Septuagintal studies. Exegesis of selected passages of the Greek Old Testament with special reference to the corresponding passage in the Hebrew text and, when relevant, its use in the New Testament. Prerequisite: BITH 524 and BITH 528, completion of Greek competency and one year of Hebrew or instructor’s approval. Counts toward Greek exegesis requirement in Biblical Exegesis program.
BITH533,Exploring the Old Testament, (4 Credits)| This course explores the Old Testament, with special attention given to the storyline, historical contexts, and genres across all sections of the Old Testament canon with the of mobilizing students to interpret Scripture.
BITH534,Pentateuch, (4 Credits)| Primeval and patriarchal history. God's sovereign rule as Creator and the choice and development of Israel as his special people. A study of the relationship between law and covenant and of Israel as a worshiping community.
BITH535,Prophets & Prophecy, (2 Credits)| A study of the phenomenon of prophecy in ancient Israel, in its theological and cultural settings. In addition to the critical issues, the major prophets will be examined and their message and theology studied as part of the mainstream of the prophetic movement.
BITH536,Old Testament Book Studies from the English Text, (2 or 4 Credits)| Studies of the content, message, and contemporary relevance of selected portions of the Old Testament against the background and the setting of the original writer and recipients.
BITH537,Old Testament I: Pentateuch & Historical Books, (4 Credits)| A comprehensive study of the first half of the Old Testament, from Genesis through Esther, with special attention given to the place of biblical criticism, cultural backgrounds and biblical theology in scriptural interpretation. This course is only open to students in the MA Biblical Studies program.
BITH538,Old Testament II: Prophets & Wisdom Books, (4 Credits)| A comprehensive study of the second half of the Old Testament, from Psalms through Malachi, with special attention given to the place of biblical criticism, cultural backgrounds and biblical theology in scriptural interpretation. This course is only open to students in the MA Biblical Studies program.
BITH539,Ancient Near East Backgrounds of the Old Testament, (2 Credits)| An introduction to background and comparative studies that will focus on methodology and the conceptual world of the ancient Near East. As the cultures and literatures are compared both similarities and differences will emerge and be evaluated for their impact and role in the exegesis of the biblical text.
BITH541,Old Testament Criticism, (2 Credits)| A study of the history, method, and results of modern historical approaches to the Old Testament literature. Attention will be given to a critical assessment of these developments from an evangelical perspective.
BITH542,Old Testament Hermeneutics, (2 Credits)| This course will introduce and utilize specific principles, resources, and skills that are necessary for interpreting Old Testament texts but not dependent on a mastery of the biblical languages. Primary attention will be given to genre analysis, socio-cultural worldview, biblical criticism (including issues of authorship and date of composition for individual books), and the theological shape of the Hebrew canon, as well as the potential contribution of these subdisciplines to the exegetical task. Prerequisite: BITH 524 Introduction to Hermeneutics.
BITH543,New Testament Criticism, (2 Credits)| A study of the history, method, and results of modern historical-critical approaches to the New Testament literature. Attention will also be given to a critical assessment of these developments from an evangelical perspective.
BITH544,New Testament I: Jesus & the Gospels, (4 Credits)| The course introduces the student to the life and teachings of Jesus and to the development of the early church, focusing on the four gospels with special attention given to the place of biblical criticism, cultural backgrounds and biblical theology in scriptural interpretation. This course is only open to students in the MA Biblical Studies program.
BITH545,New Testament II: Acts to Revelation, (4 Credits)| The course examines the book of Acts, Pauline letters, Catholic epistles and book of Revelation, with special attention given to the place of biblical criticism, cultural backgrounds and biblical theology in scriptural interpretation. This course is only open to students in the MA Biblical Studies program.
BITH546,New Testament Book Studies from the English Text, (2 or 4 Credits)| The content, message, and contemporary relevance of selected portions of the New Testament against the background of the setting of the original writer and recipients. Logical units of the NT literature.
BITH547,Life and Teachings of Jesus, (4 Credits)| The events and teachings of Jesus in their contemporary context together with an analysis of current relevant research.
BITH548,Life and Teachings Of Paul, (4 Credits)| The major aspects of the teachings of Paul in the context of his life and times as reflected in selected parts of his letters and Acts.
BITH551,Greco-Roman Backgrounds of NT, (2 Credits)| An introductory study of the Greco-Roman world, including its history, society, culture, religion, and literature, in relation to the expansion of early Christianity and the New Testament documents.
BITH552,Jewish Backgrounds of the New Testament, (2 Credits)| A study of the history, literature, and thought within Judaism in the Persian and Hellenistic periods. In providing an important backdrop to the understanding and interpretation of the New Testament, emphasis will fall on the political and economic forces at work in Palestine, as well as the religious ideas and practices.
BITH553,New Testament and Early Christian History, (4 Credits)| An investigation of the history, literature, and theology of the New Testament and Christianity prior to A.D. 325.
BITH554,Topics In Archaeology, (2 or 4 Credits)| See ARCH 554.
BITH555,Exploring the New Testament, (4 Credits)| The course introduces the student to the life and teachings of Jesus, the development of the early church, Pauline and general letters, and the book of Revelation. The focus is on biblical story and theology, and historical and cultural backgrounds in scriptural interpretation.
BITH558,Topics in Advanced Biblical and Theological Studies, (2 or 4 Credits)| Separate courses devoted to the study of topics of general interest.
BITH561,Theological Anthropology, (2 Credits)| A theological examination of the nature of persons with special reference to issues raised by modern philosophy and psychology.
BITH562,Introduction to Old Testament Exegesis, (2 Credits)| A practical hermeneutics course, orienting students to the principles and praxis of Old Testament exegesis. Focusing on selected Hebrew texts, chosen from various genres, attention will be given to the literary and rhetorical strategies employed by biblical authors to achieve their intended goals. Particular issues to be addressed include textual criticism, lexical and grammatical analysis, compositional style and genre and the broader canonical and historical contexts. Prerequisites: HEBR 301, 302, 401.
BITH563,Apologetics, (2 Credits)| Survey of the theological resources for meeting contemporary challenges to Christianity, including the problems of secularism, pluralism, evil, and the historicity of Jesus.
BITH565,Christian Theology, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the methods of systematic theology and the major topics within the biblical revelation. Special attention is given to the rationale for these Christian doctrines, their systematic interconnections as well as their development within the history of Christian thought, and their contemporary challenges.
BITH566,Foundations for Biblical Interpretation, (4 Credits)| A survey of the principles, methods, and issues of biblical and theological interpretation in the past and present. Intended for students in non-theological disciplines, as well as for those in Biblical and Theological studies who have limited theological preparation.
BITH567,Theology of the Church, (2 Credits)| See BITH 382.
BITH568,Foundations for Biblical Interpretation, (2 Credits)| A survey of the principles, methods, and issues of biblical and theological interpretation in the past and present. Intended for students in non-theological disciplines, as well as for those in Biblical and Theological studies who have limited theological preparation.
BITH569,Christian Traditions, (4 Credits)| A survey of the major Christian traditions with an emphasis on their theological presuppositions and systematic thought, including the common tradition of the early church, as well as the Orthodox, Catholic, Reformed, and modern Protestant traditions.
BITH571,Introduction to the History of Christianity, (2 Credits)| A summary introduction to the history of Christianity designed to provide a rapid but comprehensive overview to assist students who seek basic understanding of the history of Christianity as a background for other fields of study. The emphasis is upon succinct summary, and the course will focus on key turning points in Church history from the early church to the twentieth century. Graduate students will attend the same lectures as undergraduates in HIST 305 but receive different syllabi with different levels of required work.
BITH572,Doctrine of Scripture, (2 or 4 Credits)| See BITH 392.
BITH573,Scripture and Theology, (4 Credits)| An in-depth examination of the ways in which theologians use Scripture in formulating theological proposals, both with regard to Christian doctrine (theology) and Christian practice (ethics). The course explores the nature of Scripture, the authority of Scripture, and ways in which the work of theology moves beyond Scripture in order to respond to the contemporary situation of the church.
BITH576,History of Christianity to 1900, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the history of Christianity from the age of the apostles through the nineteenth century. The course treats the development of institutions, doctrines, and interactions with culture. It is divided into approximately equal sections on the early church, the church in the middle ages, the era of the reformation, and the period 1600-1900. The course is meant to be a complement of BITH 577, which focuses on the worldwide expansion of Christianity in the last two centuries.
BITH577,World Christianity, (4 Credits)| A survey of the history of world Christianity since the middle of the nineteenth century. This course includes some background on the earlier missionary expansion of the Church, but its emphasis is on the transition of Christianity from a western to a world religion in the last two centuries.
BITH581,The Reformation, (4 Credits)| The doctrines and practices of the Reformers (1450-1650) in their political, social, economic, and intellectual contexts. Special attention to Luther, the Reformed (Zwingli and Calvin), Anabaptists, the English Reformation, and the Catholic Reformation.
BITH585,History of Christianity in North America, (4 Credits)| See HIST 483.
BITH622,Theological and Religious Issues in Psychotherapy, (2 Credits)| A study of the religious issues that are confronted in psychotherapy, with an emphasis on the practical clinical applications and implications of Christian theology. The role of the psychologist as a healer and minister of grace will be considered, as well as topics such as sin and evil, confession, redemption, forgiveness, and the use of prayer and Scripture. (For Psy.D. students or with permission of instructor and department chair.)
BITH623,The History of Pastoral Care, (2 Credits)| A survey of the principles and techniques of Christian nurture (the care of souls) from the time of Gregory the Great to the modern church in America. Both primary and secondary sources are read in an effort to understand how the church has ministered to persons with various needs and in varied circumstances. (For Psy.D. students or with permission of instructor and department chair.)
BITH624,Theological Ethics for Counseling, (2 Credits)| A course designed to explore the biblical and theological foundations for a Christian ethic together with a consideration of the main Christian traditions in ethics. Case study applications will be made to issues in counseling. (For Psy.D. students or with permission of instructor and department chair.)
BITH625,Majority World Theologies, (2 Credits)| Readings and discussions on the task of biblical interpretation and theological reflection in the context of world Christianity.
BITH631,Intermediate Hebrew, (4 Credits)| A comprehensive study of the basic principles and methods of interpreting the Hebrew Old Testament. Emphasis on reading as a tool to build vocabulary and understanding of Hebrew grammar and syntax. Prerequisite: working knowledge of Hebrew.
BITH634,Poetic Books, (2 or 4 Credits)| The form and content of Hebrew poetry with its background in ancient Near Eastern literature. An examination of key passages in books such as Psalms, Proverbs, and Job.
BITH635,Hebrew Exegesis, (4 Credits)| Exegesis of books or selected portions of larger books of the Hebrew Old Testament. Capability of translation is assumed because of the prerequisite. The purpose of the course is not to teach Hebrew grammar, but to interpret the Old Testament from the Hebrew text. Prerequisites: BITH 524, BITH 508 (Introduction to Hebrew Exegesis), BITH 542 (Old Testament Hermeneutics), and HEBR 302 or Hebrew Competency. Repeatable for different topics.
BITH636,Hebrew Exegesis, (2 Credits)| Exegesis of books or selected portions of larger books of the Hebrew Old Testament. Capability of translation is assumed because of the prerequisite. The purpose of the course is not to teach Hebrew grammar, but to interpret the Old Testament from the Hebrew text. Prerequisites: BITH 524, BITH 508 (Introduction to Hebrew Exegesis), BITH 542 (Old Testament Hermeneutics), and HEBR 302 or Hebrew Competency. Repeatable for different topics.
BITH638,Old Testament Theology, (4 Credits)| The major teachings of the various parts and the whole of the Old Testament with concentration upon some of the most important themes in an attempt to discover the intention of the biblical writers.
BITH639,Advanced Old Testament Topics, (2 or 4 Credits)| Separate courses devoted to the study of specialized topics, issues, or areas within the Old Testament field.
BITH641,Current Issues In OT Studies, (2 Credits)| An examination of recent trends in Old Testament scholarship with special attention paid to significant problem areas. Prerequisite: BITH 541.
BITH645,Canonical Biblical Interpretation, (4 Credits)| An integrative course that is the capstone of the M.A. in Biblical Exegesis program. The course enables students to solidify their ability to exegete scripture with canonical sensitivity. It also guides the student in integrating a canonical perspective into the exegetical and hermeneutical enterprise, including relating parts of the testaments to one another and to their particular relevant historical backgrounds within a biblical-theological framework. Various texts and themes throughout the OT and NT will form the basis for the semester’s work. Four hours to be taken in the student’s last spring semester of the program.
BITH646,Greek Exegesis, (4 Credits)| Exegesis of books or selected portions of larger books of the Greek New Testament. Capability of translation is assumed because of the prerequisite. The purpose of the course is not to teach Greek grammar but to interpret the New Testament from the Greek text. Prerequisite: BITH 524, BITH 509 (Introduction to Greek Exegesis), BITH 531 (New Testament Hermeneutics), and GREK 102 or Greek Competency. Repeatable for different topics.
BITH647,Greek Exegesis, (2 Credits)| Exegesis of books or selected portions of larger books of the Greek New Testament. Capability of translation is assumed because of the prerequisite. The purpose of the course is not to teach Greek grammar but to interpret the New Testament from the Greek text. Prerequisites: BITH 524, BITH 509 (Introduction to Greek Exegesis), BITH 531 (New Testament Hermeneutics), and GREK 102 or Greek Competency. Repeatable for different topics.
BITH648,New Testament Theology, (4 Credits)| An investigation of the dominant themes in the New Testament in the light of the cultures in which they were produced and the methods of representative contemporary New Testament theologians.
BITH649,Advanced New Testament Topics, (2 or 4 Credits)| Separate courses devoted to the study of specialized topics, issues, or areas within the New Testament field.
BITH651,Current Issues in New Testament Studies, (2 Credits)| An examination of recent trends in New Testament scholarship with special attention given to significant problem areas. Prerequisite: BITH 543.
BITH653,Historical Theology: Patristic, (2 Credits)| An examination of the theological developments from the second through the fifth centuries. Special attention is given to the formation of the ecumenical creeds, developments in the doctrines of the canon, God, Christology, soteriology, ecclesiology, and the sacraments, as well as the nuances differentiating the Orthodox and Roman Catholic traditions.
BITH654,Historical Theology: Medieval Christianity, (2 Credits)| An examination of the theological developments from the fifth through the fourteenth centuries. Special attention is given to the relationship between reason and revelation, soteriology, ecclesiology, the sacraments, and popular piety.
BITH655,Historical Theology: Reformation, (2 Credits)| An examination of the key theological writings during the Reformation period, including selections by Lutheran, Calvinist, Anabaptist, and Catholic figures.
BITH656,Historical Theology: Modern, (2 Credits)| An examination of the theological developments from the Enlightenment to the present, focusing on key figures representing nineteenth-century German liberalism, neo-orthodoxy, post-Vatican II Catholicism, liberation, and postmodern theology.
BITH669,Topics In Theology, (2 or 4 Credits)| Selected topics in theology to provide for in-depth study of a selected topic of current interest.
BITH673,Christian Ethics, (4 Credits)| An investigation of the biblical and theological foundations of Christian ethics, with attention to a range of contemporary moral issues.
BITH674,Theology and the Liberal Arts, (4 Credits)| An in-depth examination of the interactions that have taken and are taking place between theology and the arts, as well as the natural and human sciences. Students will explore the ways that theology can assist the disciplines to be for Christ and his kingdom (and how the disciplines might return the favor to theology).
BITH675,Advanced Systematic Theology, (4 Credits)| An in-depth examination of theological method and the major theological topics within the traditional loci, employing classical and contemporary theological texts.
BITH676,Seminar Systematic Theology, (2 or 4 Credits)| 676-1 (Section 1) Focused seminars providing for in-depth research of particular persons, movements, events, eras, topics, and themes in Systematic Theology. (2 or 4 credits); 676-2 (Section 2) Focused seminars providing for in-depth research of particular persons, movements, events, eras, topics, and themes in Systematic Theology (assumes an ancient language or modern language research component in primary and/or secondary resource materials). (4 credits)
BITH677,Topics in the History of Christianity, (2 or 4 Credits)| Separate courses devoted to the study of the Christian church in specific eras or countries, or specific themes in church history.
BITH679,Seminar in Historical Theology, (2 or 4 Credits)| 679-1 (Section 1) Focused seminars providing for in-depth research of particular persons, movements, events, eras, topics, and themes in Historical Theology. (2 or 4 credits); 679-2 (Section 2) Focused seminars providing for in-depth research of particular persons, movements, events, eras, topics, and themes in Historical Theology (assumes an ancient language or modern language research component in primary and/or secondary resource materials). (4 credits)
BITH682,Colloquium in the History of American Christianity, (2 or 4 Credits)| Special courses in specific aspects or themes of the history of the church in North America. Taught in conjunction with visiting scholars sponsored by the Institute for the Study of American Evangelicals.
BITH683,Historiography of the History of Christianity, (2 Credits)| Christianity and history, with emphasis on the history of Church History, the implications for the meaning and practice of history, and the relationship of philosophies of history to the Christian faith.
BITH684,Vocation Formation in Biblical and Theological Studies, (0 Credits)| This course is encouraged for students considering doctoral work, publishing, teaching, or ministry in the fields of History of Christianity, Theology, or Biblical Studies. This course explores Christian vocation formation in scholarship, professional, and ministry contexts. Readings in Christian vocation formation are assigned and discussed. Class sessions dedicate time to equipping students with practical skills such as in academic writing, research, conference participation, and applying to Ph.D. programs. Publishing as a profession as well as teaching and church/para-church ministry are explored in terms of Christian vocation and skills.
BITH687,Seminar in American Christianity and Historical Theology, (2 or 4 Credits)| 687-1 (Section 1) Focused seminars providing for in-depth research of particular persons, movements, events, eras, topics, and themes in Church History. (2 or 4 credits); 687-2 (Section 2) Focused seminars providing for in-depth research of particular persons, movements, events, eras, topics, and themes in Church History (assumes an ancient language or modern language research component in primary and/or secondary resource materials). (4 credits)
BITH692,Graduate Comprehensive Exam, (0 Credits)| Prerequisites: The student should be in the final semester of coursework, have completed all core courses, or have completed all coursework. May be repeated once. Graded pass/fail.
BITH693,Dossier for Biblical Exegesis, (0 Credits)| A culminating portfolio from coursework within the M.A. in Biblical Exegesis that demonstrates a student's attainment of the program learning outcomes. The dossier will consist of a hermeneutics paper, an exegesis paper, a biblical theology paper, and a theology paper, all of which demonstrate an understanding and engagement with diverse ethnic, gender, and majority world perspectives. This course can only be taken during the final semester of a student's degree and is a requirement for the M.A. in Biblical Exegesis program. Prerequisite: Final semester of M.A. in Biblical Exegesis.
BITH695,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Intensive research on a precisely defined topic related to some phase of Biblical and Theological Studies. Initiative for selecting the topic and proposing the methodology rests with the student. A faculty member must approve, recommend amendments (if necessary), supervise, and evaluate the project. Limit four hours in any one degree program except by special permission.
BITH696,Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| 
BITH698,Thesis, (4 Credits)| 
BITH699,Thesis Continuation, (0 Credits)| See M.A. Thesis/Applied Thesis/Action Research.
BITH751,Introduction to Doctoral Research, (0 Credits)| Orientation to doctoral research in theology and to Wheaton's Ph.D. program in Biblical and Theological Studies.
BITH793,Directed Study, (2 to 4 Credits)| Supervised independent study in conjunction with the auditing of a regular graduate BTS course.
BITH794,Directed Study in the Liberal Arts, (2 to 4 Credits)| Supervised independent study in conjunction with a regular undergraduate course in the liberal arts.
BITH795,Guided Research, (1 to 4 Credits)| Supervised independent study.
BITH798,Supervised Pedagogical Experience, (2 Credits)| Students participate with a faculty member in teaching a course.
BITH881,Biblical Interpretation & Theology, (4 Credits)| First year PhD students’ orientation to theological interpretation and contemporary practice in biblical theology, with special attention to hermeneutical issues.
BITH882,Seminar: Topics in Biblical Theology, (4 Credits)| Intense study of a particular topic in biblical theology, normally including work in both Old and New Testaments.
BITH883,Seminar: Topics in Systematic or Historical Theology, (4 Credits)| Intense study of a particular topic in systematic or historical theology.
BITH884,Biblical/Theological Integration, (2 Credits)| Second year PhD students’ capstone regarding theological interpretation of Scripture and contemporary practice in biblical theology, with special attention to developing integrative student case study papers in relation to their dissertation subjects.
BITH898,Dissertation, (0 Credits)| 
BITH899,Dissertation Continuation (Full-time), (0 Credits)| 
BITH999,Dissertation Continuation (Part-time), (0 Credits)| 
BIOL201,Principles of Biology, (4 Credits)| A study of the concepts generally applicable to living systems, including topics of cell structure and function, heredity, evolution, ecology, and a survey of kingdoms of living organisms. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Not recommended for students interested in the health professions and not open to Biology majors.
BIOL241,Organization of Life: Genetics and Cell Biology, (4 Credits)| This course is a study of the basic organizational structure of living organisms, beginning with the chemical basis of life and its relationship to the higher levels of cellular organization. This course includes a systematic analysis of the roles of nucleic acids, proteins and lipids in the higher levels of biological organization. The mediation of life processes by gene expression, cell metabolism and signal transduction are considered in the context of prokaryotic populations and more complex multicellular organisms. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Offered every Fall.
BIOL242,Diversity of Life: An Introduction to Zoology and Botany, (4 Credits)| This course introduces the biology and diversity of select groups of prokaryotes, fungi, protists, plants and animals. Topics include taxonomic diversity, structure, and introductory physiology at the organ and tissue level. An introduction to plant biology studies the structure, function, and development of plants as organisms and the diversity of algae, fungi, and plants. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Offered every Spring (main campus) and every Summer (Wheaton College Science Station in South Dakota).
BIOL243,Processes of Life: Ecology and Evolution, (4 Credits)| This course introduces the conceptual and theoretical foundations of ecology, animal behavior, and evolution. Students will be introduced to population and ecosystem processes as well as longer term processes of change, including evolution. Evaluation of theories of species dynamics will be viewed in a Christian perspective. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Offered every Fall (main campus) and every Summer (Wheaton College Science Station in South Dakota). Prerequisite: BIOL 241 or BIOL 242.
BIOL252,Modeling the Systems of Life, (4 Credits)| Combines seminar and investigative laboratory approaches to focus on the processes of science. Organisms useful for investigation of specific biological questions will be utilized to illustrate the concept of model systems. The course will include reading and discussing primary literature and reviews, and designing and conducting experiments. Two lectures, six hours laboratory. Offered every Fall and every Spring. Prerequisites: BIOL 241 and 242.
BIOL303,Contemporary Issues in Biology, (2 Credits)| Contemporary issues in genetics, evolution, and ecology. May be applied toward the legacy general education nature requirement but not toward the Biology major. Prerequisite: 4 hr lab course in the legacy general education Studies in Nature cluster. Consult current year's course offerings. Counts as upper division science requirement for legacy general education only.
BIOL311,Reproductive Biotechnology, (4 Credits)| This course provides an overview of various biomedical techniques that relate directly to the beginnings of human life and/or to reproductive choices or decisions. The techniques considered include various methods of birth control, different forms of assisted reproduction techniques, genetic testing, genetic engineering, and stem cell research and therapy. The course covers the basic biology of these techniques and also considers them from social, theological and ethical perspectives. May not be applied towards the Biology major. Prerequisite: one Scientific Practice (SP) course.
BIOL312,Contemporary Environmental Issues, (4 Credits)| An exploration of environmental issues considering the scientific details of environmental processes and problems, the social context of people depending on the environment and human responsibility to live sustainably and care for creation. Prerequisite: one SP course.
BIOL314,Issues in Environmental Science, (2 Credits)| An interdisciplinary approach to environmental problems emphasizing humanity's role and responsibility in the stewardship of biological resources. Prerequisite: 4 hr lab course in the legacy Studies in Nature cluster. May be applied toward the legacy general education nature requirement but not toward the Biology major. Counts as upper division science requirement under legacy general education only.
BIOL315,Special Topics in Biology for General Education, (2 Credits)| Courses and seminars on special topics offered for legacy general education credit at the discretion of the department, including genetics, biotechnology, environmental issues, and bioethics. One two-hour or four-hour course may apply toward the legacy general education nature requirement. Students may register, with instructor's approval, for one additional hour in a two-hour or four-hour general education biology course to meet state teacher licensure requirements. Not open to Biology majors. Prerequisite: one legacy general education science laboratory course. Counts as upper division science requirement under legacy general education only. (1-4)
BIOL317,Biomedical Ethics, (2 Credits)| Legacy diversity designation. (lin) See PHIL 317.
BIOL318,Global Health, (4 Credits)| An interdisciplinary approach to understanding the global patterns of health and disease. Students in this course will describe and analyze how ecology, social class, race and gender impact the global burden of disease. Students will also consider how our Christian call to love our neighbor impacts our response to the disparities seen in the global burden of disease. Prerequisite: one Scientific Practice (SP) course.
BIOL319,Introduction to Environmental Ethics, (2 Credits)| An interdisciplinary consideration of ethical issues in the environmental sciences. May be applied toward the legacy general education nature requirement and the Biology major. Prerequisites: one legacy general education science laboratory course. Counts as upper division science requirement under legacy general education only.
BIOL321,Human Physiology, (4 Credits)| An examination of the major systems of the human body (neural, sensory, muscular, cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, gastrointestinal, and reproductive). Interdependence of these systems will be emphasized. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Alternate years. Prerequisites BIOL 241 and 242, CHEM 232.
BIOL331,Anatomy & Physiology I, (4 Credits)| Examination of human musculoskeletal, nervous, endocrine, and cardiovascular systems with an emphasis on their structure, function, and integration. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisites: BIOL 241 and 242; CHEM 232. Offered every Fall.
BIOL332,Anatomy & Physiology II, (4 Credits)| Continuation of BIOL 331. Structure, function, and integration of structure and function within the human lymphatic, immune, respiratory, digestive, renal, and reproductive systems. Integration of systems is emphasized. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: BIOL 331. Offered every Spring.
BIOL336,Neurobiology, (4 Credits)| A neuroscience course with three major units: the basics of neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neuroimaging, and the stress response; several key cellular and systems-level circuits within the brain that regulate metabolism, immunity, pain, memory, sleep, and interoception; and behaviors (nutrition, exercise, meditation and prayer) that promote brain health. Class sessions will include lectures, discussions, and student presentations of current research. Prerequisites: BIOL 241 and BIOL 242. AHS 271 or BIOL 252, and AHS 351 or BIOL 331 are recommended.
BIOL341,Plant Physiology, (4 Credits)| Basic principles of plant physiology including photosynthesis, mineral nutrition, water economy, respiration, nitrogen and lipid metabolism, development, growth, and plant growth substances. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisites: BIOL 241 and 242 and CHEM 232. Alternate years in Fall.
BIOL343,Plant Taxonomy, (4 Credits)| Includes systems of classification, distinguishing characteristics of groups, observation, and classification of vascular plants of the Black Hills and environs. Offered during the summer at the Wheaton College Science Station in South Dakota. Prerequisite: BIOL 242.
BIOL344,Economic Botany, (4 Credits)| Principles of plant biology (plant anatomy, biochemistry, physiology, genetics, taxonomy, and ecology) that relate to uses of plants for food, fodder, drugs and other chemicals, lumber, and other uses. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisites: BIOL 241 and 242. Alternate years in Fall.
BIOL352,Parasitology, (2 Credits)| Includes classification and identification of major groups of endo- and ecto-parasites. Life-cycles and ecology of parasite transmission will be emphasized. Three lectures. Alternate years. Prequisite: BIOL 242.
BIOL356,Genetics, (4 Credits)| Molecular, cytogenetic, classical, and population concepts of plant, animal, and human genetics. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisites: BIOL 241, 242, and 252. Offered every Spring.
BIOL362,Cell and Developmental Biology, (4 Credits)| An overview of cell structure and function and the mechanisms of biological development. Topics include cellular membranes, signal transduction, the cell surface and extracellular matrix, organelles, the cytoskeleton, the cell cycle and cancer, and cellular differentiation. Understanding of these concepts will provide the basis of study of the development of form and function during embryogenesis. Consideration of the mechanisms of development will include the basic morphological and biochemical changes which occur, as well as the molecular and cellular interactions leading to these changes. Three lectures, three hours of laboratory. Prerequisites: BIOL 241, 242. Alternate years.
BIOL364,Microbiology & Immunology, (4 Credits)| Study of the biology of microorganisms emphasizing aspects unique to prokaryotes. Topics include microbial cell structure, metabolism, physiology, genetics, and ecology. In addition, the course will include a study of bacterial and viral infectious agents and of the humoral and cellular mechanisms by which vertebrates respond to them. Laboratory exercises include techniques for detecting, isolating, cultivating, quantitating, and identifying bacteria. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisites: BIOL 241, CHEM 232; CHEM 241 or CHEM 342 are preferred. Offered every Fall.
BIOL365,Marine Biology, (4 Credits)| Study of the biology of marine organisms in the context of the geological and physical features of the ocean. Lectures, field trips, and learning snorkeling skills on campus are followed by a field trip to the Caribbean over spring break to apply these concepts to tropical marine environments. Additional lab fee assessed to cover travel and accommodation costs. Alternate years. Prerequisite: BIOL 242.
BIOL368,Invertebrate Zoology, (4 Credits)| A study of the systematics, functional morphology, ecology and research with non-vertebrate organisms. Students are introduced to the amazing diversity of terrestrial and aquatic invertebrates. Field trips to local habitats in addition to the Field Museum and Shedd Aquarium are included. The purpose of this course is to introduce the student to often overlooked organisms in the animal kingdom with the goal of cultivating a greater appreciation for this wonderful part of God's Creation. Three hours lecture and three hours lab. Prerequisite: BIOL 242. Alternate years.
BIOL372,Field Zoology, (3 Credits)| A course emphasizing observation and classification of Black Hills animals, with a concentration on insects, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Offered during the summer at the Wheaton College Science Station in South Dakota. Prerequisite: BIOL 242.
BIOL375,Introduction to Bioinformatics, (2 Credits)| This course introduces students to bioinformatics tools and analysis methods. Upon completion of the course, students should be more comfortable working with the vast amounts of biomedical and genomic data and online tools that will be relevant to their work in the coming decades. Methods for sequencing DNA and the analysis and comparison of genome data, along with methods for examining the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles, as well as phylogeny, will be discussed. Implications of all of the various types of bioinformatics data for markers of disease, genetic mechanisms, biosystematics, biodiversity, and ethics of biotechnology will be considered. Prerequisite: BIOL 241. Alternate years in Fall.
BIOL381,Public Health and Nutrition in Developing Areas, (2 Credits)| An interdisciplinary approach to the problems of health and nutrition, with emphasis on Third World countries. Prerequisite: 4 hr lab course in the legacy Studies in Nature cluster. Not open to freshmen. May be applied toward the legacy general education nature requirement but not toward the Biology major. Legacy diversity course. Counts as upper division science requirement under legacy general education only.
BIOL382,Field Natural History, (4 Credits)| Introduction to basic field and lab methods used in field natural history. Includes the basic nomenclature of flora and fauna in terrestrial, as well as aquatic systems. Basic geologic processes are discussed, and the major rock formations of the Black Hills are identified in the field. The course also provides an overview of the history and philosophy of natural history. Offered during the summer at the Wheaton College Science Station in South Dakota.
BIOL385,Special Topics In Biology, (2 Credits)| Seminars or courses in special areas offered at discretion of the department.
BIOL386,Special Topics in Biology, (4 Credits)| Seminars or courses in special areas offered at discretion of the department.
BIOL421,Basic Applications in Agronomy, (4 Credits)| See ENVR 421.
BIOL461,General Biochemistry, (4 Credits)| See CHEM 461.
BIOL494,The Integrated Biologist, (2 Credits)| A senior capstone experience in which Christian perspective and biological understanding are integrated to explore and better understand science, origins, environment, medicine, and ethical obligations. Prerequisite: senior standing, for Biology majors only. Offered every Fall and every Spring. (lin)
BIOL495,Biological Research, (2 or 4 Credits)| Laboratory and/or library research conducted with a Wheaton College Biology faculty member or with a biologist at another institution (if pre-approved by the Biology Department). Through laboratory research, students hone skills in using proper lab technique, keeping a laboratory notebook, critical thinking and problem solving, and presenting their findings in oral and/or written format. In library research, students identify and obtain pertinent articles; read, analyze, and critique the articles; and synthesize information presented in the articles. Students must prepare a short research proposal in collaboration with the participating faculty member as a prerequisite for enrolling in the course. Prerequisites: BIOL 241 and BIOL 242.
BIOL496,Biology Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| Students gain practical experience during a summer or semester in a biologically-related field. Student work is monitored and assessed by an on-site supervisor and a Biology faculty member. Prerequisites: Biology major with at least junior standing and pre-approval by the Biology Department Chair.
BIOL497,Biology Research Seminar, (1 Credit)| A weekly seminar featuring presentations and discussions of current research in biology. Most seminars are presented by biologists from other institutions. In the student journal club sessions, students collaborate with faculty in the presentation of recently published articles. Graded Pass/Fail. May be taken up to twice for credit. Can be counted as credit toward the Biology major and is not included in the calculation of the limit of three non-lab courses that can be counted toward the Biology major. One hour per week. Prerequisites: Sophomore or higher standing, Consult current year’s course offerings.
BIOL499,Biology Honors Research and Seminar, (2 Credits)| Laboratory research conducted with a Biology faculty member, and a weekly seminar involving the critique of primary literature and listening to scientific research presentations. Prerequisite: Acceptance to the Biology Honors' Program. (lin)
BEC225, Consumer Finance, (2 Credits)| Management and stewardship of consumer income and expenditures in the areas of budgeting, credit, housing and mortgages, insurance, savings and investment, and consumerism. Does not count toward a department major.
BEC226, Principles of Accounting I, (4 Credits)| An introduction to basic accounting theory, principles, and financial information systems. This first of a two-course sequence covers the double entry accrual system of accounting and addresses financial reporting issues related to accounting for current assets, liabilities, and long-lived assets.
BEC227, Principles of Accounting II, (4 Credits)| This second of a two-course sequence covers financial accounting issues related to business organization, accounting for long-term debt and owner's equity, and financial analysis. Students are also introduced to an array of managerial accounting topics including cost-volume-profit analysis, job order and process costing, budgeting, relevant costs and decision making. Prerequisite: B EC 226.
BEC229, Management Information Systems, (2 Credits)| Provides an overview of current business office software and its application and implementation within a business framework. The use of spreadsheets, databases and presentation graphics are explored as students develop their own business. The creation of a financial business plan, an inventory tracking system, and a business promotional presentation are used to develop the student’s understanding of the software as it relates to everyday business practices.
BEC321, Statistics, (4 Credits)| Foundational statistical principles including descriptive and inferential statistics, probability, hypothesis testing (one-sample tests, two-sample independent and dependent tests), ANOVA, and regression and correlation analyses. Statistical application with Excel is an integral part of the course.
BEC328, Business Ethics, (2 Credits)| See PHIL 328. Prerequisite: ECON 211.
BEC331, International Business, (4 Credits)| Examines international trade issues, investment flows, and foreign exchange concerns as they relate to the firm. The impact of legal, political, and cultural forces on the multination enterprise are examined in the context of the strategic management process. Case studies are heavily used.
BEC334, Entrepeneurship, (2 Credits)| This course uses a multi-disciplined approach to examine the qualities of a new business venture. Students will gain knowledge of how to identify potential business opportunities, conduct market analysis and feasibility studies, write a business plan, and access their entrepreneurial acumen in the context of social responsibility. Majors only. Prerequisites: B EC 226, 341.
BEC341, Principles of Marketing, (4 Credits)| Role of marketing within an enterprise. Includes a survey of the impact of product, price, promotion, advertising, distribution channels, consumer behavior, and market segmentation on marketing decisions.
BEC342, Principles of Management, (4 Credits)| Introduction to the effective management of organizations, including principles of strategizing, organizing, controlling, and leading. Special emphasis on the human side of management and the social responsibility of enterprise.
BEC343, Consumer Behavior, (4 Credits)| This course explores the psychology of consumer thought and rationale, with a focus on theory and research, for the purpose of examining the social, cognitive, and cultural factors that influence individual consumer behavior. Prerequisite: B EC 341.
BEC352, Business Law, (2 Credits)| An introduction to basic legal concepts and principles that apply to business transactions. The course will focus on the laws related to contracts, commercial transactions, and agency relationships. Ethical and other issues in business law are examined from a Christian perspective.
BEC355, Managerial Accountng, (4 Credits)| A study of accounting information for managerial reporting and decision making, including cost analysis, performance measurement, variance analysis, activity based/job order/process costing, allocation issues, information for decision making, and capital budgeting. Prerequisites: B EC 226, 227.
BEC367, Principles of Finance, (4 Credits)| This course is a study of basic financial concepts underlying valuation of financial assets and managing the firm. Financial management issues covered in the course include financial analysis, capital budgeting, capital structure, long-term financing, financial planning, dividend policy, working capital management, and international finance. Prerequisites: B EC 226 (or MATH 263 or MATH 363 or MATH 163 (AP Statistics credit)), and B EC 321.
BEC377, Marketing & Supply Chain Strategy, (4 Credits)| The importance of logistics and supply chain management is receiving top management attention in major firms on a global basis. While supply chain management has captured the attention and interest of higher-level executives, successful companies still realize that it is the logistics of an enterprise that manages order fulfillment to their customers effectively and efficiently to build and sustain competitive advantage and profitability. The logistics process affects almost every aspect of human activity, directly or indirectly. Few areas of business have as significant an impact as logistics. The primary function of this course is to provide students with a strong background in marketing, logistics and transportation within the context of supply chain management processes. Marketing and Supply Chain Strategy is a course designed to enable future business leaders to utilize business theories to analytically assess decisions and develop effective strategies through demand and supply integration. The objective of demand and supply integration (DSI) is to align sales, marketing, operations, logistics, procurement, and finance in a strategy that balances supply and demand. Prerequisite: B EC 341. Corequisite: B EC 342.
BEC382, Topics in Business, (2 Credits)| Selected topics designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of business. Prerequisite: Various depending on the topic.
BEC384, Topics in Business, (4 Credits)| Selected topics designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of business. Prerequisite: Various depending on the topic.
BEC421, Organizational Behavior, (2 Credits)| Examination of human behavior in work organizations. Focuses on enhancing individual and organizational performance by understanding motivation, job attitudes, leadership, group dynamics, organizational culture, and organizational development. This highly interactive class is run as a self-managed work team.
BEC431, Investment Analysis and Capital Markets, (4 Credits)| This course analyzes the markets for investment of funds with special emphasis on debt and equity instruments, and the determination of asset prices. The theory and practices underlying investment portfolio management also are studied as they relate to these markets. Prerequisites: ECON 211, 212. B EC 321 (or MATH 263 or MATH 363 or MATH 163 (AP Statistics credit)), and B EC 367.
BEC433, New Venture Strategy, (2 Credits)| The course is designed to provide tools that will help students develop and evaluate new business ideas. The course will discuss frameworks for understanding the entrepreneurial process, decision and behavioral sciences as they relate to business strategy, Biblical underpinnings of entrepreneurship, and financing and starting the new venture. Prerequisites: ECON 211, B EC 226, 341, 367.
BEC493, Business Strategy, (2 Credits)| A required course for Business Economics majors that highlights key principles and ideas from the business disciplines of accounting, finance, management, and marketing. A major goal of the course is to develop insights into the interrelatedness of business principles as they apply to business strategy and solving problems in the context of a competitive business environment. Case analysis and/or simulations will be used to develop the conceptual material. Prerequisites: Majors only; B EC 226 and B EC 321 (or MATH 263 or MATH 363 or MATH 163 (AP Statistics credit)); Corequisites: B EC 341, 367.
BEC494, Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| An integrative capstone course examining the liberal arts, normative aspects of business and economics, the role of Christians at work and in the marketplace. Prerequisite: B EC major and senior standing.
BEC495, Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Individual study on major issues for the advanced student with approval of the department chair. See Department guidelines.
BEC496, Internship, (1 to 4 Credits)| Credit given for pre-approved faculty-supervised involvement in the private or public sector of the economy. Open only to juniors and seniors who have completed ECON 211, 212 and any other courses deemed appropriate for the particular internship. Graded pass/fail.
BEC499, Honors Thesis, (4 Credits)| An independent research project requiring original research, developed into a scholarly paper and culminating in an oral exam. By application to the department only. The honors thesis may not be counted twoard the total hours required to complete the major. Pre-requisite: ECON 375
CHEM212,Everyday Chemistry, (4 Credits)| The course covers basic concepts of chemistry as encountered in our everyday lives - food & metabolic energy, drugs & medicines, soaps & detergents, polymers - and allows students to explore the process of scientific investigation using familiar products and materials. Includes evaluation of scientific claims (e.g., recognizing pseudoscience in commercial chemical products) and the development of a scientific argument based on experimental evidence. The laboratory includes the preparation and analysis of common chemical materials. Three hours lecture, two hours laboratory.
CHEM231,General Chemistry I, (4 Credits)| Stoichiometry, introduction to reaction types, gases, thermochemistry, atomic and molecular structures, bonding, condensed phases. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: high school algebra
CHEM232,General Chemistry II, (4 Credits)| Solutions, kinetics, chemical equilibrium, acid/base chemistry, free energy, electrochemistry, inorganic chemistry, radiochemistry, introduction to organic. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 231.
CHEM241,Principles of Organic Chemistry, (4 Credits)| A one-semester survey course in organic chemistry. Topics include common classes of organic compounds—especially those of biological interest - nomenclature, structure-reactivity, principles, reactions, and mechanisms. The laboratory stresses investigation of principles discussed in lecture. This course does not meet the requirements for medical, dental, or veterinary schools. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 232 or consent of the instructor.
CHEM294,Chemistry Colloquium, (0 or 1 Credits)| Features a variety of presentations by students, faculty, and outside speakers on topics including current research, current events in chemistry, and history of chemistry. Also includes ‘faith and learning’ discussions of various books and articles. Intended for sophomore chemistry majors, though majors from other years are also welcome. Taught each semester.
CHEM321,Pseudoscience & Faith, (4 Credits)| This course will explore scientific issues and practice by examining several notable examples of pseudoscience, which is the attempt to justify a claim about the world with dubious data and misguided scientific arguments created and analyzed outside the mainstream of traditional scientific communities. In-depth case studies related to Christian faith will include the Bible Code, the Shroud of Turin, among others. The normal practice of science will be studied through scholarly writings as well as scientific autobiographies.
CHEM336,Inorganic Chemistry, (4 Credits)| Atomic structure (nuclear and electronic), molecular orbital theory, molecular symmetry, bonding models, solid state, acid-base theory, coordination compounds, organometallic chemistry. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 342.
CHEM341,Organic Chemistry I, (4 Credits)| A two-semester study of organic chemistry. Topics include nomenclature, principles of reactivity, reaction mechanisms, synthesis, and spectroscopy. The laboratory stresses the synthesis and characterization of organic compounds. (Not open to students who have taken CHEM 241.) Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 232
CHEM342,Organic Chemistry II, (4 Credits)| A two-semester study of organic chemistry. Topics include nomenclature, principles of reactivity, reaction mechanisms, synthesis, and spectroscopy. The laboratory stresses the synthesis and characterization of organic compounds. (Not open to students who have taken CHEM 241.) Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisites: CHEM 232 and CHEM 341.
CHEM355,Introduction to Analytical Chemistry, (2 Credits)| Statistical treatment of scientific data sets (regression analysis, confidence intervals, ANOVA, principle component analysis). Solution activities. Introduction to instrumentation theory and methods for ultraviolet, visible, and atomic spectroscopy. Potentiometric and chromatographic theory. One lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 241 or 341, or consent of instructor. (lin)
CHEM371,Physical Chemistry I, (4 Credits)| A study of the laws of classical thermodynamics and their application to physical and chemical systems, followed by an introduction to kinetics, kinetic theory, and reaction dynamics. Prerequisites: MATH 231 and either PHYS 222, 229 or 232.
CHEM372,Physical Chemistry II, (2 Credits)| An introduction to quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics. Includes atomic theory, bonding theory, and computational chemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 371 (lin)
CHEM436,Physical Inorganic Chemistry, (2 Credits)| This course focuses on the bonding, electronic structure, and geometry of inorganic compounds. Topics include: molecular orbital theory, molecular symmetry, group theory, vibrational spectroscopy, electronic spectroscopy of transition metal complexes and solid state chemistry. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 371.
CHEM437,Organometallic Chemistry, (2 Credits)| A course in the structure, reactivity and applications of organometallic compounds with a focus on transition metal organometallic compounds. Topics will include: electronic structure; reactivity and mechanisms of coordination compounds; ligands, descriptive chemistry, reaction mechanisms, characterization of organometallic compounds; catalysis. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 371.
CHEM455,Advanced Analytical Chemistry I, (2 Credits)| Instrumental methods used in analysis and research. Scientific instrumentation electronics, computer interfacing, and signal processing. Cyclic voltammetry and fluorescence techniques. One lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 371 or consent of instructor. (lin)
CHEM457,Advanced Analytical Chemistry II, (2 Credits)| Instrumental methods used in analysis and research. High performance liquid chromatography, capillary electrophoresis, atomic and mass spectrometry. Tools for nanoscale/single-molecule investigations. One lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 371 or consent of instructor. (lin)
CHEM461,General Biochemistry, (4 Credits)| The chemical reaction mechanisms of life processes. The structure and function of biomolecules. Protein purification and characterization. Enzyme kinetics. Bioenergetics and the role of metabolic interconversions in energy production. Membrane transport, regulation, and compartmentation. Prerequisites: CHEM 342 or 241.
CHEM462,Advanced Biochemistry, (2 Credits)| Advanced topics in biochemistry, including biosynthesis and action of phospholipids and nitrogen-containing biomolecules. DNA and RNA metabolism. Protein synthesis. Student presentations from the biochemical literature are given. Prerequisite: CHEM 461.
CHEM463,Biochemistry Analysis, (2 Credits)| Laboratory course introducing common biochemistry techniques for experimentation, such as biological sample preparation and handling, preparing biological buffers, protein quantification, activity assays, enzyme kinetics analysis, gel electrophoresis, western blotting, expression and purification of proteins, and biomolecular separations. Each experiment is accompanied by lectures on the theoretical aspects of the topic and requires use of the biochemical literature. One lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 342; Pre or corequisite: CHEM 461. CHEM 355 recommended. (lin)
CHEM475,Methods in Physical Chemistry, (2 Credits)| A laboratory-oriented course to give experience in physical chemistry measurements. Experiments on molecular spectroscopy, crystal structure, laser spectroscopy, macromolecules, and kinetics will be included. Each experiment is accompanied by lectures on theoretical aspects of the topic. One lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 371. (lin)
CHEM485,Synthesis And Analysis, (2 Credits)| Laboratory course involving special techniques in the synthesis of organic and inorganic compounds and the spectroscopic methods of their characterization. Six hours laboratory. Alternate years. (lin)
CHEM486,Advanced Topics In Chemistry, (2 Credits)| Special topics of current interest chosen from the areas of inorganic, organic, polymer, industrial, physical, biological, or analytical chemistry. Prerequisite will depend upon the subject. May be taught as a tutorial.
CHEM494,Chemistry In Context, (2 Credits)| Capstone Course: A discussion of chemistry in historical, philosophical, and theological perspective. Includes vocation issues. Prerequisite: CHEM major with senior standing.
CHEM495,Independent Research, (2 or 4 Credits)| A research project carried out under the supervision of a chemistry department faculty member. Includes opportunities for collaborative programs with academic, government, and industrial institutions as approved by the department. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
CHEM496,Internship, (1 to 4 Credits)| Practical experience and training at an academic, government, or industrial laboratory as approved by the department. Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with Chemistry major.
CHEM499,Honors Thesis, (4 Credits)| An independent project requiring original laboratory research developed in a scholarly paper and culminating in an oral examination. Fulfills partial requirement for an honors chemistry degree. Requirements are available in the Chemistry Office or the department web site www.wheaton.edu/chemistry.
CHIN101,Elementary Mandarin Chinese, (4 Credits)| Beginning Chinese with emphasis on understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. Laboratory practice.
CHIN102,Elementary Mandarin Chinese, (4 Credits)| Beginning Chinese with emphasis on understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. Laboratory practice.
CHIN103,Accelerated Elementary Chinese, (4 Credits)| Intensive study of beginning Chinese with emphasis on understanding, speaking, reading and writing. Laboratory work. Required of heritage speakers of Chinese who speak and understand Chinese but who have little or no reading and writing ability. Also required of non-Chinese students with two years of high school Chinese or who place by test score into second-semester Chinese. Prerequisite: Heritage speakers of Chinese or non-Chinese students with only two years of high school Chinese or second semester Chinese by placement test score. Fall semester only.
CHIN201,Intermediate Mandarin Chinese, (4 Credits)| Conversation, composition, and grammar review based on readings and videos; exploration of various aspects of Chinese culture. Laboratory practice. Prerequisite to any further study in Chinese. Prerequisite: CHIN 102, 103 (or equivalent)
CHIN301,Chinese Character Acquisition, (2 Credits)| This course introduces all the basic component parts of Chinese characters and teaches how characters vary as they are combined. Through parsing characters into their component parts, understanding their historical meaning, and identifying their pronunciation hints, students are equipped to recognize, write and remember characters more efficiently as well as increase their vocabulary greatly. This course can be taken alongside a Chinese language course at the intermediate level or above. Prerequisite: CHIN 201, Language Competency equivalent or permission of instructor.
CHIN302,Chinese Through Scripture, (4 Credits)| Introduction to the Chinese Bible and its translation of selected readings. Focus on basic Christian terminology and statements in Chinese about God, Jesus, worship, and prayer. Includes discussions on Chinese cultural topics from a Christian perspective. Students practice character recognition and oral communication through reading the Bible. This course may be taken alongside a Chinese language course at the intermediate level or above. Prerequisite: CHIN 201, language competency equivalent, or permission of instructor.
CHIN303,Chinese Grammar, (4 Credits)| Introduction of the major features of Chinese grammar. Discussion of structures, situations, and functions and practice with corresponding exercises. May not be taken pass/fail. No auditors. Prerequisite: CHIN 201, competency equivalent or permission of instructor.
CHIN331,Chinese Conversation, (4 Credits)| Intensive practice in oral communication and listening comprehension with emphasis on natural spoken expression based on audio materials, videos, and readings of authentic texts. Students will also develop reading and writing skills through expanding their learning of additional Chinese characters. Prerequisite: CHIN 201 or completion of the Language Competency requirement in Chinese at Wheaton College.
CHIN332,Chinese Composition, (4 Credits)| Students learn punctuation, sentence and paragraph structures, and the basics of Chinese literary styles such as narrative, description, exposition, argument, correspondence, etc. This course emphasizes writing practice as well as group discussions, presentations and oral compositions. Prerequisite: CHIN 201, Language Competency requirement or permission of the instructor.
CHIN334,Intro to Chinese Culture, (2 Credits)| Students gain their initial understanding of Chinese customs and cultural essence prior to or during their trip to study in China. With a special emphasis on comparing and contrasting this course examines both the similarities and differences of the East and the West to help students get a deeper understanding of the Chinese culture as well as their own cultural heritage. Daily journaling is required with some suggested reading materials. Offered in China or on campus. Prerequisite: Acceptance into Wheaton in China program or permission of instructor.
CHIN335,Business Chinese, (2 Credits)| This course introduces Chinese communication skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) used in various business situations. Students build vocabulary and social awareness via business websites and documents and practice communicative skills through simulations and related business tasks. Students will also gain understanding of the social and cultural aspects of the Chinese business context. This course may be taken alongside a Chinese language course at the intermediate level or above. Offered every other year. Prerequisite: CHIN 201, Language Competency requirement or permission of the instructor.
CHIN336,Chinese Cinema, (4 Credits)| Viewing, analysis and critique of Mandarin-language films from Mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong depicting urban and rural contexts. Practice in aural comprehension, reading authentic texts, writing synopses and reviews; discussion of character development, thematic analysis and cinematic techniques. Prerequisite: CHIN 201, Language Competency requirement or permission of instructor.
CHIN337,Readings of Chinese Society and Culture, (4 Credits)| Selected readings of authentic texts on topics of Chinese culture, contemporary Chinese life, and social issues as well as from various literary works. Dual emphasis on language learning and building of cultural awareness. Students will expand their reading vocabulary, increase their reading speed, and improve their reading comprehension through class participation, presentation and discussion. Prerequisite: CHIN 201, Language Competency requirement or permission of instructor.
CHIN338,Advanced Chinese in China, (4 Credits)| Advanced Chinese in China. Development of oral proficiency. Immersion experience and practice on culture and language. Grammar, conversation, and composition taught by native speakers in a Chinese university setting. Course content and level variable. Offered in China only. Prerequisite: CHIN 201 or permission of instructor. Corequisite: Acceptance into Wheaton in China program.
CHIN341,Special Topics in Chinese Language and Culture, (4 Credits)| Further development of oral proficiency. Immersion experience and practice on culture and language. Advanced grammar, conversation, and composition taught by native speakers in a Chinese university setting. Course content and level variable. Offered in China only. Prerequisites: CHIN 331 or permission of instructor. Corequisite: Acceptance into Wheaton in China program.
CHIN346,Modern Chinese Literature, (4 Credits)| Introduction of literary works of major Chinese writers during the twentieth century. Readings include short stories, poetry and essays, each placed in its unique societal, historical, and political contexts so as to present a holistic picture of a modern China. All texts will be studied in Chinese. Prerequisite: CHIN 337 or permission of the instructor.
CHIN351,Classical Chinese Poetry, (2 Credits)| This course offers learners some of the basic tools for reading Classical (literary) Chinese, the written language of China from the sixth century B.C. through the second century A.D. and well beyond. Students will read the most well-known poems of the Tang poets including Li Bai, Du Fu, Wang Wei, etc. Prerequisite: CHIN 201, Language Competency requirement or permission of instructor.
CHIN494,Senior Seminar, (4 Credits)| Examination of literary or cultural topics from perspectives of contemporary critical theory. Students produce a major research paper that integrates faith with the subject matter. Prequisites: CHIN 331, 332, Study Abroad, CHIN 337, 346 or departmental approval.
CE111, Foundations of Ministry, (2 Credits)| This course provides a foundation for the work of ministry through an introduction to evangelism and discipleship. Through an overview of the ministry of Jesus, students will learn the basic principles involved in the kingdom work of presenting the Gospel and making disciples in an ever changing world.
CE115, Introduction to Christian Formation and Ministry, (4 Credits)| This course is designed to introduce students to central themes and concepts in Christian Formation and Ministry, including biblical foundations, historical foundations, social science foundations and essential practices of spiritual formation, discipleship, and Christian teaching.
CE131, Introduction to Spiritual Formation, (2 Credits)| Provides for the self-evaluation of personal faith and character and opportunities for expressing a greater commitment to life in Christ. Students choose one of three tracks - wilderness expedition, urban track, or camp experience - which is combined with reading assignments, Scripture studies, and group discussions. Open to incoming students accepted to the Wheaton Passage wilderness, urban, Northwoods or equestrian programs at HoneyRock held prior to fall semester.
CE212, Discipleship and Small Groups, (4 Credits)| This course, offered in conjunction with Discipleship Ministries programs on campus, seeks to nurture wisdom and small group ministry experience as students prepare to be lay ministers. While we probe the knowledge of God and the knowledge of self, the course will help students understand and embrace the calling to be a disciple of Jesus and to help others become disciples of Him. This course is a requirement for the undergraduate Discipleship Certificate in the Christian Formation & Ministry department. This course does not meet any CE major requirements and can only serve as elective credit in the major or minor.
CE216, Discipleship Practicum, (1 Credit)| Integrating the theories learned in the classroom with involvement in a Discipleship Ministries program, students will participate in a leadership role within DSG, Strongholds, or a Family Group through the Chaplain's Office. The practicum includes a summative assignment in which students consider the links between ministry principles, personal spiritual formation, and practical skills. (1) Practica may be repeated up to a maximum of four times for credit.
CE219, Christian Formation Forum, (0 Credits)| Each semester, the CFM department will offer a forum on a topic related to the discipline. The focus of these forums will be to expose students to key issues in the field and to foster interdisciplinary discussion. Students majoring in CE will be required to attend 4 of these forums before graduation. Graded pass/fail
CE222, Transformational Education, (4 Credits)| Considers historical educational theory and processes as well as current learning theory in light of the biblical genres. Includes various teaching methods and introductory curriculum development.
CE223, Human Development & Ministry, (4 Credits)| Explores the application of human development and other social science theory and research to Christian Education. Spiritual development through the lifespan is highlighted, as well as the importance of understanding social context and organizational dynamics for effective ministry.
CE226, Christian Spiritual Practices, (4 Credits)| An introduction to Christian Spiritual Formation as the integration of theological understanding, faith, and spiritual practice. This laboratory course in spiritual formation explores the relational, spiritual and missional practices of the Christian spiritual life - Christian formation in community and service to the world (e.g., corporate worship, spiritual friendship, spiritual direction, small group accountability, hospitality, evangelism, compassion, social justice, creation-care). Students will study, practice, and theologically reflect on these as biblical, historical, and psychological perspectives are brought to bear on the experience of class members individually and in the context of congregational leadership.
CE231, Evangelism, (2 Credits)| Provides an overview of the Gospel, Great Commission, and Great Commandment. Emphasis is given to surveying the tools needed for the task of world evangelism with emphasis on personal preparation for one-to-one evangelism within a variety of contexts.
CE232, Spiritual Guidance and Discernment, (2 Credits)| This course is designed as a practicum experience in Christian spiritual guidance and discernment. Out-of-class attention will be given to a protestant interaction with the spiritual exercises of Ignatius Loyola and the experience of meeting with a spiritual guide or listener. In-class lectures will entail seminar format discussion and debriefing of class readings and practices as they pertain to guidance and discernment.
CE234, Youth Ministry, (4 Credits)| This course introduces students to the theories and practices of ministry with adolescents, including biblical and theological foundations, developmental and socio-cultural theories and research, historical and contemporary models of youth ministry, and the development of a philosophy of youth ministry.
CE241, Leadership Development, (4 Credits)| This course will develop students' leadership potential for a life of kingdom service. Students will understand and critically assess their personal leadership and develop an integrated philosophy of leadership. This philosophy will be implemented and assessed during the summer as students create formational experiences in an adventurous setting, discipling campers for God's mission back home. This course is offered each summer at HoneyRock as part of the Leadership Certificate.
CE251, Ministry Practicum, (0 Credits)| Integrating the theories learned in the classroom with the practices of ministry, students will participate in a specific ministry context approved by the CFM Internship Coordinator and their faculty advisor. The practicum includes a summative assignment in which students consider the links between ministry principles, personal spiritual formation, and practical skills. Graded pass/fail.
CE259, Topics In Christian Education, (2 or 4 Credits)| Examines ministry concerns, problems, and trends in light of a holistic Christian Education theory.
CE321, Teaching the Bible, (4 Credits)| Designed to acquaint students, through both theory and practice, with the principles of effective biblical instruction. Methods of interpretation and literary aspects of the Bible are emphasized. Prerequisite: C E 222
CE333, Student Care in College Ministry, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the basic concepts and skills involved in the student care aspect of residence life ministry at Wheaton, including a brief overview of historic and biblical foundations for caring ministry, categories of student struggle most commonly experienced in college residence life ministry, rudimentary person-to-person helping skills, and small group supervision. This course is limited to residence assistants.
CE337, Compassion in Ministry, (2 Credits)| Compassion is central to effective ministry leadership. This course introduces students to the types of human suffering encountered by those in ministry leadership and to rudimentary skills for responding effectively. We will consider biblical, historical and contemporary models for compassion in ministry. Only one of C E 337 and C E 339 may be taken for credit. Mainly taught at HoneyRock.
CE339, Compassion and Crisis Ministry: Responding to Trauma and Suffering, (4 Credits)| Introduction to the basic concepts and skills involved in ministry responses to trauma and suffering. Course content will include an overview of the historic ministry of soul care, biblical foundations for crisis ministry, major categories of human suffering and trauma across cultures and contexts, and rudimentary compassion and crisis ministry skills. Only one of C E 337 and C E 339 may be taken for credit. Mainly taught on campus.
CE341, Spiritual Theology: Knowing & Experiencing God, (4 Credits)| Spiritual theology is the practical, experiential exploration into the major themes of Christian theology. It is concerned with both how we think about God and how we live our lives with God and others. Therefore, this course seeks to integrate the principles and practices of doctrine and life. Special attention will be placed upon our experience of God and how we can reflect upon those experiences to deepen our knowledge and love of God and our neighbor.
CE345, Worship and Spirituality, (4 Credits)| This course introduces students to the dynamic and formative power of worship. The central question what happens when people worship God? will be examined from a number of different angles. Further, we will explore how Christian formation through worship shapes our experience of God and how thoughtful and biblically planned worship can increase that experience.
CE346, Discipleship, (4 Credits)| This course introduces students to the foundational principles for effectively using the Bible and theology in discipleship. It recognizes that all believers are challenged to discover their vocation as ministers in whatever career they pursue. Within that context various methods for studying and teaching Scripture and the doctrines of the Trinity, Natural and Special Revelation, Anthropology, Grace and Community will be examined to equip students in their life-long calling of discipleship.
CE351, Intercultural Studies I: Authority Action Ethics: Ethiopia - Theory, (2 Credits)| Theory is a deep analysis of the fundamental stories (authority), practices (action), and systems of evaluation (ethics), which are always implicit in any case of leadership around the world, including 'ministry' leadership and service learning. This course will provide an introduction to a specific international context and the underlying themes of the narratives that shape individuals and cultures, the practices found within the outworking of those narratives (be they religious, political, ethnic, economic, cultural, sociological, anthropological, theological, etc.) and supportive challenge in the exploration of how we evaluate global situations and experiences. Application and acceptance into this program is required.
CE352, Intercultural Studies II: AAE-Praxis, (2 Credits)| Praxis builds upon the corequisite work completed in Intercultural Studies I. The fundamental stories (authority), practices (action), and systems of evaluation (ethics) implicit in leadership around the world are further developed as students explore major differences between cultural systems while building attitudes and skills necessary for effective intercultural ministry. A program trip to the context in study, in May, offers contextualized experiences and debriefing for the theory explored in the classroom. Additional fees required. Prerequisite: C E 351
CE353, Leadership & Human Systems, (2 Credits)| This course provides the next level of development after the Leadership Development course of SLS for supervisory leadership roles at HoneyRock. Prerequisite: C E 241
CE412, Ministry Practicum, (2 Credits)| This is an experience-based course designed to provide students an opportunity to implement leadership concepts and theories and develop their own leadership qualities through direct experience and team development. Graded: pass/fail
CE414, Ministry with Children and Families, (2 Credits)| See CFM 613.
CE421, Philosophy of Ministry, (4 Credits)| Integrates various academic disciplines into a logical philosophy of ministry by studying major foundational concepts and issues of Christian Education.
CE422, Curriculum & Instruction, (4 Credits)| Studies curriculum theory, development, and evaluation as they relate to one's philosophy of ministry. Attention is also given to instructional design based upon principles of human learning and development. Prerequisite: C E 421.
CE425, Ministry with Children, (4 Credits)| See CFM 621.
CE451, Ministry with Families, (2 Credits)| See CFM 611.
CE452, Camp Ministry, (2 or 4 Credits)| Provides a study of and involvement in the use of a camping environment for the growth and development of people. Special attention is given to program philosophy and principles for designing, conducting, and evaluating an effective camp ministry for young people. Offered at HoneyRock.
CE459, Advanced Study in Christian Education, (2 or 4 Credits)| Provides small group study of special areas of interest in Christian Education. Topics will vary from term to term. Prerequisite: junior/senior standing or permission of instructor.
CE461, Leadership in Christian Ministry, (2 Credits)| Involves a study of organizational structures and administrative procedures which are useful in Christian Education programs. Emphasis will be given to the management of resources such as time, personnel, and information.
CE462, Ministry Research and Evaluation, (2 Credits)| Explores methods of research and evaluation in ministry contexts, including needs analysis, purpose statements and research goals, data collection/ongoing assessment, and analysis of results. Attention will be given to reading and writing research reports, as well as application of existing research to ministry contexts.
CE471, Prayer, (2 Credits)| See CFM 533.
CE472, Adventure Challenge Ministry, (4 Credits)| Explores the theory of experiential education and its ministry applications through the medium of engaging adventure challenge experiences. Includes the role of facilitative leadership, group and individual problem solving, and disciplined reflection in promoting Christian maturity in others. Offered at HoneyRock.
CE474, Integrative Leadership Seminar, (2 Credits)| A course designed to develop advanced critical thinking and personal philosophy of leadership. Students will integrate their knowledge of leadership and faith while collaboratively identifying and assessing a real world leadership issue. This is a 400 level course that necessitates a major research paper and analysis/integration paper that draws on their multiple leadership experiences and all the courses they have taken up to this point as part of the Leadership Certificate. Offered at HoneyRock.
CE494, Senior Capstone, (4 Credits)| The Core Curriculum Capstone Experience allows students to pursue deep integration of their major and the concepts they have explored throughout the entire Christ at the Core curriculum. The Capstone Experience also considers how the First Year Seminar, the Advanced Integrative Seminar, and course work in their major prepares them for their vocation after Wheaton. The Capstone enables students to reflect upon their practical ministry experiences and therefore is taken after or concurrent with the internship in the major. This course, in combination with C E 496 Internship, meets the general education Christ at the Core graduation requirements.
CE495, Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Focuses on field or library research according to individual interests and competencies in Christian Education.
CE496, Internship, (0 Credits)| Provides practical experience under supervision in a setting appropriate to the student's major interests. Prerequisites: junior standing and a minimum of 16 hours completed in Christian Education including background courses appropriate to the internship setting. Graded pass/fail.
CE497, Internship Seminar, (2 Credits)| Provides student debriefing on their internship experiences from several perspectives while making preparations for post-graduation plans. (C E 496 is a prerequisite, but with approval from the Internship Coordinator, a concurrent enrollment is allowed.) Graded pass/fail.
CFM512,Bible in Ministry, (2 Credits)| This course acquaints students with the formative nature and power of Scripture. It explores the principles and practices of using Scripture in ministry through reading, study, devotion, and meditation in personal, small groups and teaching, and related ministries of the church.
CFM513,History and Philosophy of Ministry, (4 Credits)| Helps students become more informed and effective ministers through the analysis of ministry and educational philosophies that have guided the church throughout its history. Provides a framework within which to formulate a biblically and historically informed philosophy of ministry.
CFM514,Ministry in Culture, (2 Credits)| Explores foundational cultural issues from a Christian, socio-cultural perspective. Provides opportunities for students to cultivate theory and practice of ministry in the multicultural American society, as well as the Church around the world.
CFM516,Teaching for Transformation, (4 Credits)| Promotes Christian growth through educational planning and evaluation. Methods of teaching, curriculum design, and character of the teacher are considered.
CFM517,Developmental Theory and Spiritual Formation, (2 Credits)| An introduction to biblical, historical, and theological understandings of the nature of persons and the integration of relevant psychological and sociological understandings of human development. In addition, students will be encouraged to consider the application of these foundations to the contemporary work of Christian formation and ministry.
CFM518,Research Methods for Ministry, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the theory and practice of research methodologies as they relate to Christian formation and ministry.
CFM521,Personal Spiritual Formation, (2 Credits)| An introduction to personal spiritual formation, including spiritual health and the practice of spiritual disciplines. Includes an off-site weekend retreat.
CFM522,History and Traditions of Spiritual Formation, (2 Credits)| This course traces some of the dominant themes of Christian spirituality. Through biblical, theological, and historical study, we will examine how various individuals and movements have experienced and sought to nurture their relationship with the Triune God. Particular attention is paid to developing the skills of discernment for reading these primary sources.
CFM523,Ministry Leadership and Organization, (4 Credits)| Introduction to issues of ministry leadership, including organizational theory, ethics, conflict management, and personal concerns for integrity and spiritual health.
CFM525,Camp Ministry in Global Context, (4 Credits)| This course explores the theory and practice of doing ministry in diverse cultural contexts in the United States and globally. Students cultivate active cultural sensitivity through tools that include taking an inventory, conducting an ethnographic study, and partnering with a Christian camp ministry from a different geo-cultural context.
CFM532,Discipleship, (2 Credits)| This course examines the biblical and historical models and principles for the life-long process of making disciples in a changing culture. Built on the foundation of spiritual formation and mentoring, students will be challenged to grow as disciples so that they might also equip and encourage others to grow in following Jesus.
CFM533,Prayer, (2 Credits)| Provides a theory-based examination of prayer, especially within the historic evangelical faith.
CFM534,Care and Counsel in Ministry, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the basic concepts and skills involved in care and counsel within ministry contexts including an overview of the historic ministry of soul care, biblical foundations for care in ministry, major categories of human suffering, and rudimentary person-to-person helping skills. This course is designed to enable those in ministry to help individuals and families understand and deal with contemporary issues-e.g., divorce, grief, suicide, conflict, etc.
CFM535,Advanced Curriculum Development for Ministry, (2 Credits)| This course focuses on advanced curriculum design and development for ministry purposes, and the roles of learning environments and experiences in facilitating spiritual growth. Includes practical components integral to these issues.
CFM536,Worship & Spirituality, (4 Credits)| See C E 345.
CFM542,Ministry Research & Evaluation, (2 Credits)| See C E 462.
CFM545,Student Development Leadership and Organization, (4 Credits)| An introduction and overview of the administration and organization of College Student Affairs with an emphasis on its historical and philosophical foundations, its basic documents and leadership strategies and issues. Staff selection, training, supervision, policy development, and program implementation and evaluation are addressed.
CFM546,Facilitating Collegiate Learng, (4 Credits)| The college student experience must be built upon learning opportunities throughout the entire systems (i.e., academic and social) and within all facets of higher education. No department or entity is exempt from the opportunities to impact student learning and development. This course is designed to explore and equip students for these opportunities via understanding the student learning paradigm and its application to higher education practice.
CFM547,Philosophy of Ministry, (2 Credits)| This course helps students become more informed and effective ministers through the analysis of key ministry and educational philosophies. Provides a framework within which to formulate a biblically, theologically, and philosophically informed philosophy of ministry.
CFM548,Program Planning and Leadership, (2 Credits)| This course studies the process of developing outdoor and adventure based programs which will align with the mission, vision and values of an organization and serve the identified target groups in a meaningful way. As part of this course, students will build on their philosophy of ministry by developing, implementing and evaluating programs in real ministry settings. Co-rerequisite: CFM 547.
CFM564,Challenge Course Leadership, (4 Credits)| This course applies theories and principles of leadership, spiritual development and experiential education to challenge programming specifically utilizing ropes courses, team initiatives, climbing, and other outdoor adventure activities. Students will apply learning by developing, leading and evaluating short term (1/2-day to 3-day) adventure education experiences for a variety of groups. This course is offered as an intensive at HoneyRock. Prerequisite: CFM 661.
CFM565,Temporary Communities and the Church, (4 Credits)| This course explores the mission and nature of the Church and how the temporary system can serve its renewal and development. Students examine historical and theological expressions for the church, including the church/parachurch dynamic. They study biblical principles and the practices of renewal, hospitality, and service.
CFM611,Ministry with Families, (2 Credits)| An examination of the nature of marital and family relationships in preparation for students in ministry to understand these dynamics in their own families, in the families of those to whom they minister, and the impact of these on their ability to be effective ministers. The course concludes with a consideration of church as the family of God.
CFM612,Ministry with Children and Families, (4 Credits)| This course examines the nature of family relationships and the spirituality of children in light of biblical, theological, and developmental perspectives. The course is intended to equip ministry students to understand these dynamics in their own families, in the families of those to whom they minister, and the impact of these on their ability to be effective ministers. The course also includes a consideration of church as the family of God.
CFM613,Ministry with Children and Families, (2 Credits)| This course examines the nature of family relationships and the spirituality of children in light of biblical, theological, and developmental perspectives. The course is intended to equip ministry students to understand these dynamics in their own families, in the families of those to whom they minister, and the impact of these on their ability to be effective ministers. The course also includes a consideration of church as the family of God.
CFM621,Ministry with Children, (4 Credits)| Examines the nature and spirituality of children in light of biblical, theological, and developmental perspectives. Analyzes current ministry practices in light of cultural trends. Also focuses on the faith experiences of children.
CFM631,Youth Ministry, (4 Credits)| Introduces students to biblical foundations, developmental and socio-cultural theories and research, historical and contemporary practice, and philosophy of youth ministry.
CFM641,College & Young Adult Ministry, (4 Credits)| Explores the theories and practices of ministry directed toward college students and young adults. Emphasizes the developmental and cultural dynamics of the young adult years and the practical implications of a biblical philosophy of discipleship for identity development, character education, worldview construction, and spiritual formation. The course is relevant for anyone ministering to college students and/or young adults in the local church or in a college/university context.
CFM651,Adult Ministries, (2 Credits)| Examines the principles and methods of adult ministry in the church with particular attention given to non-formal education. Explores the nature of defining, developing, and evaluating educational experiences in non-formal settings with an eye for their unique ministry contributions.
CFM661,Foundations of Experiential Education, (4 Credits)| This course introduces the principles and practices of experiential education in outdoor settings. Students will apply principles of experiential learning, spiritual development and leadership to outdoor programs utilizing group processes, adventure courses, and a wilderness expedition.
CFM662,Theology and Practice of Outdoor Adventure Leadership, (4 Credits)| This course is the foundational overview of the Outdoor Adventure Leadership Concentration of the Wheaton Graduate School. It is designed to equip students personally, spiritually and communally for a life of leadership and ministry in outdoor related ministries by helping students to develop personal vision, ministry skills, interpersonal competence, and a ministry philosophy. This course is offered in a modular format at HoneyRock.
CFM663,Organizational Leadership and Staff Development in Outdoor Ministry, (4 Credits)| The outdoor and adventure ministry context is an excellent laboratory for equipping leaders for the church and society worldwide. This course is designed to help students develop principles and competencies to enhance their own leadership practice and to cultivate an approach to ministry that facilitates leadership development in those who serve and are served in the adventure ministry setting. Additionally, students will learn principles for effective organizational leadership. Students will design and evaluate leadership development programs in an outdoor ministry setting as part of this course. Offered in a modular format at HoneyRock.
CFM664,Wilderness Programming and Leadership, (4 Credits)| This course emphasizes the uniqueness of the wilderness classroom and teaches students to utilize extensive wilderness expeditions to draw others to Christ and develop them into whole and effective people. The course covers program models and planning processes, various outdoor and leadership skills needed for wilderness ministry, and how God uses silence, creation, and group problem-solving to develop disciples. It is offered almost entirely in the wilderness classroom and as an extended expedition during multiple times and at multiple sites each year. This course is offered through HoneyRock.
CFM683,Integrative Seminar, (0 Credits)| Integrates the various courses of the CFM program into a unified whole. The Integrative Seminar fosters reflection on the academic, spiritual, and practical aspects of the degree while also assisting in plans for future growth and development in these areas. Includes a summative case study evaluation. Prerequisite: All CFM core courses must be completed or in process.
CFM691,Concentration Mentoring Group, (0 Credits)| Within each concentration of the CFM masters program, students will meet in a small mentoring group to discuss their academic progress, spiritual formation, and development of practical ministry skills. Taken every semester, repeatable.
CFM692,Creative Project, (2 Credits)| Prerequisite: Dept. approval of student's Final Project Proposal.
CFM693,Ministry Practicum, (0 Credits)| Provides students the opportunity to participate in a ministry context, integrating the theories learned in the classroom with the practices of ministry. Includes a summative assignment in which students consider the links between ministry principles, personal formation, and practical skills.
CFM694,Current Issues in Christian Formation and Ministry, (2 or 4 Credits)| Provides opportunity for advanced students to study collectively some topic or concept in greater depth, or to explore a specialized topic and its relationship to an understanding and practice of Christian Formation and Ministry. Topics will vary and will be determined by department faculty members.
CFM695,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Focuses on field or library research according to individual interests and competencies in Christian Formation and Ministry.
CFM696,Internship, (2 to 4 Credits)| Provides advanced students the opportunity to have a better understanding of ministry theory and practice by working and studying alongside a competent, authorized professional in Christian ministry. Includes a summative paper or reflection and analysis of the learning that occurred and its significance for future ministry (due after the internship). Prerequisite: Internship application approval.
CFM698,Applied Thesis/Thesis, (2 Credits)| Prerequisite: Dept. approval of student's Final Project Proposal.
CFM699,Final Project Continuation, (0 Credits)| 
CMHC611,Foundations of Integration I, (1 Credit)| A seminar in which an understanding of social, cultural, and spiritual context is developed to facilitate an integrated view of the person and of mental health practice. Emphasis is on historical, philosophical, and theological perspectives.
CMHC612,Foundations of Integration II, (1 Credit)| A continuation of seminar I which facilitates an integrated view of the person and of mental health practice. Emphasis is on application of faith practice integration to the treatment of marginalized populations and service to the church worldwide.
CMHC613,Foundations of Integration III, (1 Credit)| A seminar that focuses on entry into clinical mental health practice, including application for licensure, models of supervision and consultation, and building a career and/or ministry in the mental health field.
CMHC614,Group Counseling, (2 Credits)| The study of group counseling, theory, and models of practice, including the role of group leadership; tools for forming a group and orienting members; and catalysts for interaction, skills for conducting and evaluating counseling/therapy groups. Emphasis will be given to ethical issues. Must be taken concurrently with CMHC 614L.
CMHC614L,Group Counseling Lab, (1 Credit)| Provides an experiential small group designed to promote personal and professional growth. Graded pass/fail. Concurrent registration with CMHC 614.
CMHC618,Research Design and Program Evaluation, (3 Credits)| Overviews the research and program evaluation methodologies available to mental health professionals. Emphasis will be given to the design, implementation, and critique of clinically relevant research.
CMHC621,Counseling Skills & Techniques, (2 Credits)| Focuses on the development of counseling skills and techniques essential to clinical mental health practice, from a humanistic/experiential and existential perspective. Must be taken concurrently with CMHC 621L. This course is available only to CMHC students.
CMHC621L,Basic Counseling Skills Lab, (1 Credit)| A basic skills lab involving practice, video-taped sessions, and supervision of counseling skills necessary to establishing and maintaining a professional helping relationship. Concurrent registration with CMHC 621. This course is available only to CMHC students. Graded pass/fail.
CMHC622,Clinical Counseling Theories and Practice I, (3 Credits)| The study of theories and models of personality and psychopathology, as well as methods of counseling, from a psychodynamic perspective. Emphasis will be given to the development of appropriate counseling treatment plans. This course is available only to CMHC students.
CMHC623,Clinical Counseling Theories and Practice II, (3 Credits)| The study of theories and models of personality and psychopathology, as well as methods of counseling, from a behavioral and cognitive - behavioral perspective. Emphasis will be given to the development of appropriate counseling treatment plans. This course is available only to CMHC students.
CMHC624,Issues and Ethics in Professional Practice, (3 Credits)| Introduces concepts regarding the professional functioning of counselors, including history, roles, professional organizations, ethics, legalities, standards, and credentialing. Current issues in the practice of counseling in a professional setting are explored. This course is available only to CMHC students. Course Fee. (Program counseling fee – 1st semester)
CMHC631,Lifespan Development, (3 Credits)| Addresses the major theories of human development across the life span. Stages and developmental tasks related to normal development, prevention of mental health crises, and counseling are explored. Concerns of individuals at different life stages are addressed, with an emphasis on the physical, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual growth of the individual.
CMHC632,Crises & Community Counseling, (3 Credits)| An introduction to community and crisis counseling and models of community resiliency. Emphasis on providing evidence-based clinical interventions in disaster and crisis situations, including emergencies requiring advocacy, intervention, and support. Topics addressed include vicarious trauma, psychological first aid, suicide prevention models, and community based prevention and intervention strategies. Counselors' roles and responsibilities during crises and counselor self-care strategies will be explored. Prerequisites: CMHC 621, 622, 623.
CMHC633,Couples Counseling, (3 Credits)| An introduction to the practice of couples counseling, including an overview of the major models and techniques from both the professional and Christian literature with special attention to ethnicity and gender issues in couple assessment and treatment. Discussion of contemporary issues including divorce, remarriage, domestic violence, infidelity, cross-cultural marriage, same sex couples, couples in ministry, and gender issues will be emphasized.
CMHC636,Family Systems Theory and Counseling, (3 Credits)| An examination of the major models of family systems theory and counseling applied to the understanding of normal and abnormal family functioning. This course is available only to CMHC students.
CMHC641,Assessment in Counseling, (3 Credits)| A clinical skills course focusing on the principles of measurement and assessment and counseling use of various assessment instruments: achievement, aptitude, intelligence, interest, and personality. Covers supervision in administering, scoring, and interpreting assessment tools.
CMHC642,Psychopathology: Biological and Sociocultural Foundations, (3 Credits)| The study of the major mental disorders as defined by the DSM including an introduction to the etiology, diagnosis, treatment, appropriate psychopharmacological interventions, biological bases of behavior, and spiritual dimensions of these disorders. Explores the impact of culture and emerging technologies on the treatment of individuals and groups.
CMHC644,Child and Adolescent Development and Treatment, (3 Credits)| An examination of the models of understanding child and adolescent development and psychopathology and an introduction to the treatment modalities for children and adolescents.
CMHC647,Foundations of Play Therapy, (3 Credits)| Provides an overview of the essential elements and principles of play therapy, including history, theories, modalities, techniques, applications, and skills. Emphasizes an experiential component focused on basic play therapy skill development within the context of ethical and diversity sensitive practice. Prerequisites: CMHC 621, 622, and 631 or permission of instructor.
CMHC649,Multicultural Issues and Social Advocacy in Counseling, (3 Credits)| Examines theories of multicultural counseling, identity development, pluralistic trends, and the application of culturally appropriate intervention strategies to individuals, couples, families, groups, and communities. Major ethnic groups are studied, along with the counseling, social justice, and advocacy approaches to each. Counselor cultural self-awareness and the role of counseling in eliminating bias, prejudice, oppression, and discrimination are emphasized.
CMHC651,Substance Abuse and Addictions, (3 Credits)| A survey of basic issues surrounding the conceptualization, etiology, progression, assessment, and treatment of chemical abuse, dependence, and addiction, including the study of the family of the chemically dependent individual.
CMHC653,Lifestyle & Career Development, (3 Credits)| An overview of theories of occupational choice and career development and their application to assessing, treating, and preventing career problems across the life cycle.
CMHC661,Spiritual Direction and Care of the Soul, (3 Credits)| An introduction to the contemporary and classical literature and traditions of Christian spirituality and spiritual direction and their relevance to the helping professions. Psychology’s neglect of the spiritual life and of the church’s tradition of soul care addressed.
CMHC691,Comprehensive Exit Exam, (0 Credits)| Objective written comprehensive exam that may be taken at any point in the program once the student has completed 36 hours of coursework. The exam covers the eight CACREP common core areas: Human Growth, Social and Cultural Foundations, Helping Relationships, Group Counseling, Career and Lifestyle Development, Appraisal, Research and Program Evaluation, and Professional Orientation and Ethics. Students are permitted up to 3 exam attempts within 12 months before being assigned a final grade in the course. Students have one year from the first test date to retake the test twice (for a total of three times). Course is not repeatable. Prerequisites: CMHC 614, 614L, CMHC 618, 621, 621L, CMHC 622, 623, 624, 631, 636, 641, 642, 649, and CMHC 653. Graded pass/fail. Fee $50
CMHC692,Graduate Counseling Practicum, (3 Credits)| Introductory supervised field experience that provides students with the opportunity to observe clinical mental health professionals as they function and to develop primary level mental health service provision skills. Participation in a regularly scheduled professional development seminar with faculty is required. Graded pass/fail.
CMHC695,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Guided research on an elected problem in counseling or the related fields of prevention or psychoeducation.
CMHC696,Graduate Internship, (3 or 6 Credits)| Supervised clinical experience in an approved setting that provides students with the opportunity to develop entry level counseling skills necessary for professional mental health practice. Participation in a regularly scheduled professional development seminar with faculty is required. Prerequisite: CMHC 692. Graded pass/fail.
CMHC698,Advanced Graduate Internship, (1 to 3 Credits)| Supervised clinical experience in an approved setting that provides students with the opportunity to develop advanced counseling skills. Participation in a regularly scheduled professional development seminar with faculty is required. Prerequisite: CMHC 696 or permission of CMHC program director. Graded pass/fail.
COMM101,Public Speaking, (2 Credits)| A performance-based course to aid students in the invention, organization, delivery, and criticism of informative and persuasive speeches. This course does not meet major requirement. Gen Ed Oral Communication competency.
COMM171,Introduction to Acting, (2 Credits)| An investigation of the fundamentals of acting technique through foundational exercise and scene work, including observation, physical awareness, stage discipline, and text analysis.
COMM201,Fundamentals of Oral Communication, (4 Credits)| A performance-based course involving the nature of communicative interactions, message construction and criticism, and ethical responsibilities involved in communicating. Required of majors and minors. Gen ed oral communication competency, for majors and minors only.
COMM215,Journalism, (4 Credits)| An overview of basic writing skills utilized in mass media, with a practical emphasis on the gathering and writing of news and sports, and analysis of campus and metropolitan newspapers.
COMM219,Journalism Co-Curricular, (0 Credits)| A periodic gathering of journalism students for the purpose of applying and broadening the academic discussion of journalism. Students are required to attend two approved events per semester for four semesters.
COMM221,Interpersonal Communication, (4 Credits)| An examination of face-to-face interactions using cognitive learning, skills training, and experiential techniques to better understand and interact with others. Topics include verbal messages, nonverbal communication, listening, self-disclosure, conflict, gender roles, and intercultural communication.
COMM223,Communication & Diversity, (2 Credits)| An overview of how perceived difference shapes and influences our interaction with others. Discussion covers the impact of diversity on language, nonverbal communication, mediated messages, relationships, and conflict. Course may be repeated for credit in Gender or Intercultural communication. Legacy diversity designation.
COMM224,Communication & Diversity, (4 Credits)| An overview of how perceived difference shapes and influences our interaction with others. Discussion covers the impact of diversity on language, nonverbal communication, mediated messages, relationships, and conflict. Course may be repeated for credit in Gender or Intercultural communication.
COMM241,Media Studies, (4 Credits)| An introduction to approaches and practices used to examine and evaluate the media environment. Background readings, examination of current criticism, and beginning practice in media criticism are employed.
COMM242,Media Performance, (4 Credits)| A skills-based course for in-studio practice of audio and video technique in news, music, and narrative broadcast programming. Students are coached in voice, diction, and production logistics.
COMM243,Digital Society, (4 Credits)| An examination of the new media environment and its influence on social spaces, cultural meanings, and human interactions.
COMM246,Media Production, (4 Credits)| An overview of media production skills with an emphasis on recording, editing, and producing using new media technologies and distributing them in varying outlets. Students will be expected to create video blogs, podcasts, and other new media texts.
COMM252,Argumentation and Debate, (4 Credits)| A performance-based course in which students learn argument design, including use of reason and evidence, and practice in competitive debate. Gen Ed Oral Communication competency.
COMM253,Messages Influence & Culture, (4 Credits)| An introductory study of the relationship between rhetoric and social change, focusing on the rhetoric of oppressed groups in America. Topics include the rhetoric of social movements, poverty, race, gender, and power. Legacy diversity designation.
COMM271,Theater Survey, (4 Credits)| An exploration of the history of theater, the nature of theater as a communication art, and the roles of playwright, director, scenographer, actor and audience.
COMM272,Scenography, (4 Credits)| An exploration of scenographic theory and production practices necessary to move theater design from page to stage, including scene design, stage lighting and costuming. Prerequisite: COMM 271 or permission of instructor.
COMM273,Acting I, (4 Credits)| An investigation of the fundamentals of acting technique through foundational exercise and scene work, including observation, physical awareness, stage discipline, and text analysis. Prerequisite: COMM 271.
COMM275,Musical Theater London, (2 Credits)| See MUCS 275.
COMM296,Journalism Practicum, (2 to 4 Credits)| A lower level experiential learning internship enabling students beginning their journalism program to gain hands-on experience under professional supervision. The Program Coordinator will supervise this course in conjunction with a site supervisor. Internship form required.
COMM301,Communication Theory, (4 Credits)| An overview and integration of current approaches to understanding interpersonal, small group, organizational, mass, and intercultural communication. Prerequisite: COMM 201 and Junior standing or permission of instructor.
COMM302,Rhetorical Theory, (4 Credits)| An historical and critical analysis of the modes of persuasion. The contributions of Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Quintilian, Augustine, as well as selected medieval, renaissance, modern, and postmodern theorists will be considered. Prerequisite: Junior standing or permission of instructor.
COMM311,Human Communication Research, (4 Credits)| An overview of methods and techniques for systematic observation of communication behavior. Students will learn to design, run, and analyze various qualitative and quantitative methods in areas of their communication interest. Prerequisites: COMM 201 and COMM 301, or permission of instructor.
COMM312,Communication Criticism, (4 Credits)| A study of communication performances using a variety of methods, with special attention to textual analysis. Texts selected will be taken from mass media, theater, and public speaking. Prerequisites: COMM 201, and COMM 301 or 302, or permission of instructor.
COMM341,Media Religion and Culture, (4 Credits)| An examination of the intersection of media and religion from a cultural and theological perspective. Prerequisite: COMM 241 or permission of instructor.
COMM343,Writing for Media, (4 Credits)| An overview of the craft of writing promotion and programming for radio, television, feature film, and multimedia. Prerequisite: COMM 241 or permission of instructor.
COMM345,Narrative Media, (4 Credits)| A skills-based course in non-linear editing, advanced techniques of media production, sound design, and directing. Students will make a narrative or documentary visual production, utilizing lighting, sound, and directing.
COMM353,Advanced Persuasive Speaking, (4 Credits)| A skills-based class in which students become proficient in researching and delivering public speeches and oral performance within a variety of contexts. Prerequisite: COMM 101, 201, 252, or passed oral competency exam.
COMM362,Group Dynamics, (2 Credits)| An experiential course which integrates theory and practice in small task groups. Topics include roles and leadership, discussion, decision making and problem-solving, social influence, conflict, power, and interaction in peer groups.
COMM363,Persuasion, (4 Credits)| An examination of theories of attitude and behavior change, specific techniques of persuasion, and analysis of contemporary practitioners. Students will gain experience in attitude research and preparing a persuasive strategy.
COMM367,Reconciliation & Conflict Resolution, (2 Credits)| This course provides theoretical and practical resources for working through conflict in interpersonal, group, and international contexts. An emphasis will be placed on negotiation tactics and reconciliation processes.
COMM373,Theater Workout, (0 or 1 Credits)| Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. One hour credit per year. Register for credit in Spring semester. Graded pass/fail
COMM374,Directing, (4 Credits)| An investigation of the stage director's art and craft: play selection, casting, mounting the play, rhythm, characterization, and actor-director relationships. Prerequisites: COMM 271 and 273. Fee for Chicago theater.
COMM375,European Theater Studies, (2 Credits)| Students will study contemporary European theater in production. Selected playwrights, performance theory and styles will be studied in the class to be used as a basis for the evaluation of live performances in London, Paris, Berlin and Prague.
COMM376,Church And Theater, (4 Credits)| An investigation of the theological and aesthetic relationships of the church to the dramatic arts. Lab experiences facilitate practical application of these discoveries.
COMM393,Intercollegiate Debate (Practicum), (0 or 1 Credits)| Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. One hour credit per year (4 hours maximum; 2 hours maximum if combined with COMM 252). Register for credit in Spring semester. Graded pass/fail.
COMM415,Special Topics in Journalism, (4 Credits)| An advanced study of such topics as interviewing, community journalism, ethics and the law, and investigative reporting. Guest instructors will be selected who have established professional success in journalism. Course may be repeated for separate topics. Prerequisite: COMM 215 or permission of instructor.
COMM416,Special Topics in Journalism, (2 Credits)| An advanced study of such topics as interviewing, community journalism, ethics and the law, and investigative reporting. Guest instructors will be selected who have established professional success in journalism. Course may be repeated for separate topics. Prerequisite: COMM 215 or permission of instructor.
COMM424,Special Topics in Interpersonal Communication, (2 or 4 Credits)| An advanced study of such topics as listening, nonverbal communication, friendship, family relationships, non-profit organizations, and sports communication. Prerequisite: COMM 221 or permission of instructor. Course may be repeated for separate topics.
COMM444,Special Topics in Media and Culture, (2 to 4 Credits)| An advanced study of such topics as globalization, iconomy, virtual identities, and media and politics. Prerequisite: COMM 241 or COMM 253, or permission of instructor. Course may be repeated for separate topics.
COMM445,Media Constructions, (4 Credits)| An advanced study of professional-level video production, with structured teaching leading to high quality portfolio presentations in the media industry. Prerequisites: COMM 246 and 345 or permission of instructor.
COMM454,Special Topics in Rhetoric & Culture, (2 or 4 Credits)| An advanced study of such topics as Civic Discourse, Critical Approaches to Rhetoric and Culture, and Public Advocacy. Prerequisite: COMM 253 or permission of instructor. Course may be repeated for separate topics.
COMM461,Organizational Communication, (4 Credits)| An application of communication theory and research in work contexts. Both corporations and non-profits will be examined through case studies, site visits, interviews, applied research, and team work projects.
COMM473,Acting II, (4 Credits)| An application of developing acting skills to a series of exercises, monologues and scenes. Prerequisites: COMM 271, 273, or permission of instructor. May be repeated as Acting II: Shakespeare.
COMM474,Special Topics in Theater, (2 or 4 Credits)| An advanced study of such topics as Theories of Contemporary Theater, Advanced Production, and Theater and Culture. Prerequisite: COMM 271 or permission of instructor. Course may be repeated for separate topics.
COMM476,Theater and Culture, (4 Credits)| The course will examine the role of the theater as a vehicle of social change throughout history and in contemporary culture. Through selected play readings and laboratory experiences, the student will be challenged to explore the responsibility of the Christian theater artist to his/her local and global community. Prerequisite: COMM 271 or permission of instructor.
COMM494,Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| An overview and integration of ethical perspectives as students consider the role of responsible communication in contemporary society. Development of the portfolio assessment is included. Prerequisite: COMM major with Senior standing.
COMM495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| An investigation of current issues and developments in a specialized area of communication. Prerequisites: two appropriate Communication courses and permission of a professor.
COMM496,Internship, (2 to 4 Credits)| An application of course work that engages the student in a responsible role as a worker in an organization or other practical experiences. Prerequisites: 16 hours in Communication; junior or senior standing with Communication major or minor. Graded pass/fail. (may be repeated for a maximum of eight credits, but only four hours count toward the major.)
COMM498,Journalism internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| An application of course work that engages the student in a responsible role as a worker in the journalism profession. This experience will receive a letter grade based on a portfolio of work, journal entries, summative essay, and site supervisor evaluation.
CSCI135,Computer Literacy, (2 Credits)| An introduction to personal computing emphasizing major applications (word processing, spreadsheets, databases, and/or presentations). Other topics include the history and organization of computers, effective use of the Internet, web page design, electronic library resources, and ethical issues of technology.
CSCI215,Web Design & Programming, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the design and preparation of pages and sites for the World Wide Web. Topics include principles of design, markup and formatting of pages, tools for developing web content, and use of embedded scripting on client and/or server. No prior programming experience is required.
CSCI231,Introduction to Computer Science Concepts, (2 Credits)| A survey of the fundamental ideas and methods in the science underlying computation. Classroom activities and hands-on laboratory investigations emphasize working with both data and process at different levels of abstraction, from logic and circuits to algorithms and formal machines. History of computing and its relation to other disciplines. Societal and ethical issues raised by computing technologies. (Two hours lecture with two hours lab) lin.
CSCI233,Introduction to Scientific Computing, (4 Credits)| Introduction to programming and computer analysis of data for scientific applications. Scripting and treatment of numerical issues are integrated into the content stream.
CSCI235,Programming I: Problem Solving, (4 Credits)| A first course in computer programming for beginners. Structured and object-oriented programming in Java or a similar programming language. Types, control structures, methods, and recursion; objects, classes, interfaces, encapsulation and polymorphism; exceptions, library classes, file I/O, linked lists, and graphical user interfaces.
CSCI243,Discrete Mathematics and Functional Programming, (4 Credits)| Sets, logic, the nature of proof, induction, algorithms, algorithm correctness, relations, lattices, functions, and graphs. Functional programming and recursion using the ML programming language. May not be taken after MATH 341 or MATH 351.
CSCI245,Programming II: Object-Oriented Design, (4 Credits)| A gateway to the computer science major, introducing a range of themes in the field of computer science. Object-oriented programming in Java or a similar language: code reuse with composition and inheritance; generic types; design patterns. Software development: development tools, attributes of good design. Algorithmic analysis; searching and sorting algorithms. Abstract data types: stacks, queues, trees, hashing; linked vs array-based implementation. Systems programing in C; pointers and dynamic allocation; model of machine memory, organization, and execution. Prerequisites: CSCI 235 or departmental approval.
CSCI301,Computer Science Colloquium, (1 Credit)| A departmental forum in which current developments and interdisciplinary topics relating to computer science are discussed. Students who have not completed the prerequisites are encouraged to attend as observers but may not register for credit. Students may enroll more than once, for a maximum total of 2 hours credit. Prerequisites: Department approval.
CSCI335,Software Development, (4 Credits)| Principles and practices of software development including design patterns, validation and testing, coordination of team projects. Introduction to databases and user interface design. Professional issues in computing. Prerequisite: CSCI 245; pre- or co-requisite: CSCI 243.
CSCI345,Data Structures & Algorithms, (4 Credits)| Formal and experimental approaches to verifying algorithms' correctness and analyzing their efficiency. Abstract data types and their implementations. Efficient implementations of maps using balanced binary search trees and hash tables. Graph algorithms. Dynamic programming. Prerequisites: CSCI 243 and CSCI 245.
CSCI351,Introduction to Computer Systems, (4 Credits)| An introduction to low-level systems issues from the perspective of the programmer. Representation of both data and program as produced by a compiler; hardware support for memory, input/output, and parallelism; fundamental ideas in operating systems and networking. Prerequisite: CSCI 245.
CSCI355,Computer Architecture, (4 Credits)| Computer architecture, low-level C programming, assembly language, parallel programming. Macro definitions, information encoding, addressing techniques, parameter passing, call frames, optimization, and parallel organization. Prerequisite: CSCI 351.
CSCI357,Networking, (4 Credits)| Examination of the fundamental problems in computer internetworking, from the link to application levels, with particular attention to the Internet protocols. Issues include naming/addressing, error-handling, routing, and decentralized control. Prerequisite: CSCI 351.
CSCI361,Computer Graphics, (4 Credits)| Introduction to graphical programming environments, OpenGL libraries. Rendering three-dimensional images, transformations, windowing, clipping, shading, and image enhancements. Prerequisite: CSCI 345.
CSCI365,Programming Language Concepts, (4 Credits)| A survey of the design and implementation of programming languages: grammars, parsing, and abstract syntax; compilers, interpreters, and other language systems; type-checking and other static analyses; formal semantic specifications; implementation of imperative, functional, and object-oriented language features; type-soundness proofs; tail form and continuation passing style. Prerequisites: CSCI 335 and CSCI 351.
CSCI371,Database Management Systems, (4 Credits)| History and motivation for database systems. Entity-relationship model, relational model, SQL overview, keys. Relational algebra and calculus, SQL nested, aggregate, cursor queries, null values. Storage of data on disk systems, file organization, hash and tree indexing. Schema refinement and normal forms. Web-based access of database systems. Transaction processing. Prerequisites: CSCI 335 and CSCI 345.
CSCI375,Artificial Intelligence, (4 Credits)| Definition of intelligence, representation of knowledge, search strategies, heuristics, control of process, natural language processing, vision systems, expert systems, robotics. Integrative issues of AI and Christianity. Prerequisite: CSCI 345.
CSCI384,Computational Linguistics, (4 Credits)| An exploration of big ideas in computational linguistics, natural language processing, and/or language technologies. Language models, n-grams, information theory and entropy, and semantics. Applications of computational linguistics such as part-of-speech tagging, authorship attribution, automatic translation, and sentiment analysis. Prerequisite: CSCI 345 (non-majors without the prerequisite may enroll with departmental approval).
CSCI394,Seminar, (2 or 4 Credits)| Selected topics in Computer Science at each offering, including such subjects as object-oriented design, e-commerce, human computer interface, networking services. May be taken again when a different topic is offered. Prerequisite: Departmental approval.
CSCI395,Computer Science Project/Minor Capstone, (2 to 4 Credits)| This course consists of a special project supervised by a member of the computer science faculty. Project proposals must be submitted by the student, along with a proposed number of credit hours, and approved by the department prior to enrollment in the course. Prerequisite: CSCI 335.
CSCI445,Analysis of Algorithms, (4 Credits)| An introduction to algorithmic efficiency and to techniques for the design and analysis of efficient algorithms. General topics include review of asymptotics, algorithm design techniques (such as divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, and greedy algorithms), graph algorithms, languages and automata, and NP-completeness. Prerequisite: CSCI 345.
CSCI455,Operating Systems, (4 Credits)| Dynamic process activation, system structure, abstract machines, kernels, performance evaluation, memory management, processor management, time management, recovery procedures, file systems, security, scheduling, device management, networks. Prerequisites: CSCI 335 and CSCI 351.
CSCI493,Mentoring Seminar, (2 or 4 Credits)| Faculty and student collaboration on a project of mutual interest. Limited enrollment - faculty approval required.
CSCI494,Social and Ethical Issues in Computing, (2 Credits)| A study of the ways in which the computer and communications revolution is changing society to develop an awareness of and sensitivity to the ethical issues that arise in computer science and related professions. Prerequisite: Senior standing in the major.
CSCI495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| An individually adapted study of any aspect of computing science or its relationship to other fields of study.
CSCI496,Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with Computer Science major. May repeat once for a total of 4 hours.
CORE101,First Year Seminar: Enduring Questions, (4 Credits)| This course introduces students to practices of integrative thinking by engaging challenging, theologically significant enduring questions in a seminar-style course organized around a theme tied to the faculty member's specialty. The course will have three interrelated components: foundations for addressing the value and purpose of liberal arts education, focused study of the abiding liberal arts question What is the good life?, and exploration of a related perennial question chosen by the instructor. All components of each seminar will emphasize integrative intellectual practice and model the integration of faith and learning in the liberal arts context. Please note these descriptions are for the last 4 weeks of the course and do not describe the focus for 2/3 of the semester and the first 12 weeks of the course.
CORE301,AIS: Human Trafficking: Causes Consequences and Responses, (4 Credits)| This course examines the causes and consequences of human trafficking from diverse disciplinary perspectives, including political science, economics, history, theology and psychology. The course covers the definitions and historical development of sex and labor trafficking and critically reflects on diverse efforts to reduce trafficking in human beings, including Christian responses to slavery over time.
CORE302,AIS: Political Science Fiction, (4 Credits)| This course takes up important works of science fiction to engage on important themes in moral and political theory and the interrelation of philosophical reflection, imaginative literature, and theological commitment.
CORE303,AIS: Making the Modern Middle East, (4 Credits)| This course explores modern Middle East history from the final decades of the Ottoman Empire to the formation of modern Iraq, Iran, Turkey, Lebanon, Syria, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Palestine, and Israel. Special attention will be given to the cultural impact of imperialism and contemporary political and social trends in the region. Other course themes include Western involvement in the Middle East, the growth of Islamic reform movements and Arab nationalism, Zionism, competing visions of womanhood in Islam and Judaism, and religious fundamentalisms. Our goal will be to understand how Christians should engage the Middle East in cultural and scholarly encounters. (cannot satisfy HP secondary tag in transition gen ed).
CORE304,AIS: Christian Environmental Stewardship, (4 Credits)| Students will examine the biblical mandate for creation care and develop a personal response to the call for stewardship of land and creature. This course will provide students with a basic understanding of ecosystem biology and provide the framework for which students can understand the need for resources and the impact of resource extraction on human health, while providing a biblical and theological lens for developing an appropriate response.
CORE305,AIS: Spiritual Formation in Young Adulthood, (4 Credits)| Explores the development of faith during the years of emerging adulthood (18-29), focusing on the connections between Christian spiritual formation and the psychological and sociological dimensions of this life stage. Emphasizes the formation of faith within the context of emerging adult identity, worldview, vocation, morality, sexuality, and church participation.
CORE306,AIS: Drugs Society and Religion, (4 Credits)| This course examines the psychological effects and neurobiological mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugs. Drugs are used in the treatment of psychopathological disorders, recreational substances of abuse, and in some cultures for religious rituals. This course is designed to provide undergraduate students interested in the mechanisms of action of drugs on the brain, how they are understood in different societies, and how they have historically been used for recreational and religious purposes.
CORE307,AIS: Cosmology, (4 Credits)| Cosmology refers to the scientific study of the large scale properties and history of the physical universe as a whole. Utilizing the methods of science, it seeks to understand the origin, evolution and ultimate fate of the universe. Cosmology also refers to philosophical inquiry into the history and general structure of the universe, especially with respect to questions of origin, fundamental elements, causality, laws and agency. Drawing upon these disciplines, this course aims toward formulating a fully informed, deeply integrated understanding of the world in which we live, move, and have our being. (cannot satisfy PI secondary tag in transition gen ed).
CORE308,AIS: Engaging Arts in the City, (4 Credits)| A multi-arts experience and analysis course in Chicago (or other city) comprised of a series of site visits to art events/performances/organizations chosen for their embodied, authentic responses to life. Site visits may include professional or educational productions that have musical, theatrical, dance, visual arts, or any kind of collaborative arts focus. Through seminar presentations, discussions, and final projects, students will learn how to decode what inspires an artwork's creation, and how to listen and respond to cultural and art modality otherness.
CORE309,AIS: Native Jesus: The Art & Literature of Native America, (4 Credits)| This course examines art and literature of Native North American communities, both ancient and modern, with a view to how such communities relate to the Christian tradition. How is Christianity rejected, appropriated, or transformed through Native American literature and art? What has Cahokia to do with Jerusalem? Following a historical overview, the course is organized geographically, covering all the major areas of native culture on this continent (South, East, West, & North) culminating with our own region of the Midwest. Native artistic responses to modernity are also considered. Multiple area site-visits and meetings with Native Americans will enhance student investigations. (cannot satisfy LE secondary tag in transition gen ed).
CORE311,AIS: The Good in the Great Plagues, (4 Credits)| An interdisciplinary consideration of major infectious disease epidemics throughout history. This course is a survey and analysis of the impact of epidemic diseases and their potential beneficial outcomes. The diseases discussed will include leprosy, several pandemics of plague, tuberculosis and AIDS, among others. The biological basis for the diseases will be presented along with the historical and social context for each. An emphasis will be placed on the intersection of scientific and theological perspectives on the impact that major infectious diseases have had.
CORE312,AIS: Colonialism and Redemption, (4 Credits)| Colonialism and Redemption is an interdisciplinary course designed to explore the Native American experience through the lens of anthropology, history, and theology. Starting with Indigenous settlement of North America and concluding with present day life on the Pine Ridge Reservation, the location of Wounded Knee, the course will explore the history and perspectives of the Native inhabitants of Turtle Island from the pre-contact to the present day.
CORE313,AIS: Sport Faith and Social Change, (4 Credits)| Sport and athletes have often been agents of social change, at times challenging norms and assumptions concerning identity, personhood, gender, race, and sexuality. In this class, we will examine how sport and moments in sport history has served as a public stage to perform dramas of social change leading to larger movement activities that impacted culture. Students will apply theories and explore research of mediated sports events to understand their impact and gain perspectives on how sports may be exploited to enact social change. This class will examine sport in three dimensions: as an artifact of our society and mediated history; as an arena where social, cultural, and political issues are contested; and as a vehicle for spiritual reflection and growth. We will examine how we can encounter the Holy in the midst of sports and its impact on developing a critical assessment of one's values.
CORE314,AIS: Economy & Society, (4 Credits)| Economic sociology has sought to understand the beliefs, norms and institutions that shape and drive the global economy. Markets, organizations, and individual economic actors cannot be understood outside of their social and cultural context. In interacting with texts primarily by sociologists and economists, in addition to historians, anthropologists, and political scientists, this class aims to use a broader social scientific approach to understand the relationship between economy and society, and the ways in which social networks, norms and institutions matter in economic transactions.
CORE315,AIS: Social Network Analysis, (4 Credits)| This advanced integrative seminar is designed to give students the basic tools to ascertain if particular missionaries, based on their primary documents, were engaged in a holistic Gospel or one that conflated non-spiritual enterprises. Basic Greek tools, historical methodologies, and social network analysis (NodeXL) will be utilized in this course.
CORE316,AIS: Sport Psychology, (4 Credits)| A survey of the theory, research, and applications of psychology pertaining to sports. This course will prepare students to: 1) discuss and understand the psychological factors that influence involvement and performance in sports, 2) apply psychological research and theories to one's own sports involvement as a participant (e.g. teacher, coach, athlete, etc.). The course will examine psychological variables that can hinder or enhance athletic performance, which may include attention, arousal, motivation, relationships, mental imagery, gender and diversity issues, eating disorders, and substance abuse. PSYC 101 suggested.
CORE317,AIS: Media Revolutions from Gutenberg to Google, (4 Credits)| From Gutenberg to Google, communication technologies have changed how people work, live, think, interact, and collaborate. They have bound humans together in unprecedented ways, opening up new individual possibilities but also unleashing disruptive collective energies. Together we will explore how new media - from the first printed books of the fifteenth century to the networked computing devices of the twenty-first century - have shaped the modern world. This is an interdisciplinary course. We will learn about theories and methods different disciplines use to study the media and will develop critical tools for understanding our own ongoing digital and information revolution. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Society (History) Cluster.
CORE318,AIS: Faith Reason and Politics in Islam, (4 Credits)| This course examines the development of Islamic political philosophy from its origins under Muhammed to its central role in twenty-first century politics throughout the world. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Faith and Reason (Philosophy) Cluster.
CORE319,AIS: Epic and Philosophy: From Achilles to Ahab, (4 Credits)| Students will engage with two monumental literary texts--the Iliad and Moby Dick--by using the tools of both the disciplines of literature and philosophy. Students will also read selections from the western philosophical canon (thinkers like Plato, Aristotle, Nietzsche, Camus, Kierkegaard, and MacIntyre) that will be placed in conversation with these literary texts. These readings, and the discussions that accompany them, will center around certain perennial questions, especially those having to do with ethics and the good life: e.g., what (and who) is good and just and how do we know? Through a series of writing assignments that require the close-reading of literature and analysis of philosophical arguments, students will compare and examine their own understanding of these perennial questions from the perspective of their own faith. Finally, they will write a term paper that synthesizes their learning from both sorts of readings and that requires them to do further research. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Faith and Reason (Philosophy) Cluster
CORE321,AIS: 'Holla If Ya Hear Me': Engaging Hip-Hop Culture, (4 Credits)| Since its emergence in NYC during the 1970s, rap music has grown in the global phenomenon. Approaching hip-hop culture from an interdisciplinary perspective, this course will examine the origins, themes, and social impact of rap music as an outgrowth of hip hop culture. This course will prepare students to critically engage and evaluate popular forms of cultural expression with academic rigor and biblical principles.
CORE322,AIS: What is Money Good For? - A Comparative Global Investigation, (4 Credits)| What is money good for? Why do some people have so much and others so little? Can a person deserve prosperity? How should we spend our money? How do our purchases shape who we are? Why should we give, and how? If you wrestle with these questions, you are not alone. People across the world find ways to answer these questions, and their diverse answers are likely to surprise, confound, convict, and also inspire us. In this course we consider a wide spectrum of responses to moral questions about money from the United States and around the world. We read works by Christians, anthropologists, and other theorists in order to craft more nuanced Christian responses to these questions. Along the way, we gain perspectives on cultural diversity and the causes of economic inequalities both within the United States and around the world.
CORE323,AIS: Humanitarian Disasters and Recovery, (4 Credits)| Exploration of scientific and social understanding of humanitarian disasters including the causes of natural and human-caused disasters, approaches to prediction and mitigation, impacts on communities and societies, approaches to recovery and care, resilience, theological implications and the role of faith-based responders.
CORE324,AIS: Black Bodies in Literature and Theology, (4 Credits)| This course invites students to enter into an important conversation about race and the body, sin and redemption. Literature and theology are disciplines uniquely equipped to help us learn the viscerality of race and racism, the stories of particular people - people created in the image of God and redeemed by a savior who made the particulars of the visceral body his own. Through reading and discussion of literature and theology, we will explore the possibilities for redemption and healing in a way that acknowledges sin and looks for healing. This seminar invites students to explore texts that focus on black bodies, particularly in the contemporary United States, while calling its members to critical thinking, Christian interdisciplinarity, and empathy.
CORE325,AIS: Nature Environment and Society, (4 Credits)| An interdisciplinary exploration of contemporary environmental issues and problems. The understanding of the natural world will support the analysis of the role of society in creating, perpetuating and addressing these challenges. The role of personal and cultural responsibility for stewarding the natural environment will be emphasized. Field and classroom investigations will focus on the Black Hills context. Course fee $50
CORE326,AIS: Classics of Christian Devotion, (4 Credits)| This course examines the human longing for a relationship with God. Competing with this deep desire is the complexity of external and internal barriers. The best of Christian writers have recognized that this yearning for God must integrate both the interpretative and affective dimensions of awareness. Built on the foundation of differing methods of interpretation, this course is structured around the literary genres of narrative, visionary discourse, hymns, prayers, sermons, letters, autobiography, aphorisms and novels that both inform and transform the cultivation of intimacy with God. These classic texts are from both the Roman Catholic and Protestant traditions. Since many contemporary Evangelicals are unfamiliar with their own spiritual heritage, this course compares and contrasts Evangelical spiritual texts with pre-eighteenth-century Roman Catholic and Protestant literature.
CORE327,AIS: Propaganda and Image in Everyday Life, (4 Credits)| Propaganda techniques have saturated everyday life. By studying primary sources from ancient and modern authors, and applying the lessons of 20th century propaganda campaigns to today's public persuasion, students will critically engage distinctions between propaganda and ethical communication, between truth and image, and between the artificial and the real. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Faith and Reason (Philosophy) Cluster.
CORE328,AIS: Mary Mother of God, (4 Credits)| This course is a tour through twenty centuries of perspectives on the Virgin Mary, with a focus on how those perspectives emerge and are propagated both through theological texts and the visual and performing arts. Students will be required to evaluate which aspects of the Marian tradition can be appropriated (and developed), and what aspects should be criticized or rejected. Student projects will examine historical theological documents, sources from the visual and performing arts, and feminist concerns with an eye toward how the Marian tradition can enrich the contemporary church. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Society (History) Cluster.
CORE329,AIS: Neurobiology and Spiritual Formation, (4 Credits)| Engages students in considering the nexus between the anatomy and physiology of the brain and the spiritual formation of human persons from a Christian worldview. Students will be required to examine how each of these disciplines informs the other, to learn a variety of epistemologies from different disciplines and apply them to this area, to intelligently critique research and applications, and to integrate neurobiological research with spiritual practices and formation of human persons.
CORE331,AIS: Ugaritic Language and Literature, (4 Credits)| This course is intended to introduce students to the language, history, and literature from the ancient 'city-state' of Ugarit. Language competency in Hebrew recommended. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Society (History) Cluster.
CORE332,AIS: Women Writing Theology, (4 Credits)| This course explores works of literary and theological merit by women investigating ideas about God, the self, and society. Drawing on writings of women from different eras, cultures, and backgrounds, the course encourages students to dialogue with fiction and non-fiction writings, including novels, poetry, life writings, and systematic theologies, by women to understand better how women have communicated theological ideas through a wide range of literary and theological forms.
CORE333,AIS: Country Behind the Curtain: Public Institutions & Private Life in the German Democratic Rep, (4 Credits)| During its 40-year history, the German Democratic Republic (GDR), aka East Germany, was divided from its western counterpart by ideologies, alliances and institutions - and, after 1961, by a fortifies border that came to symbolize the Cold War. Through interaction with post-1989 oral histories, prose and poetry from East German authors, and pre- and post-unification films, students in this AIS will explore the fundamental paradoxes between public institutions and private life in the GDR, wrestling with the central irony that private convictions and aspirations became a key factor in its dissolution.
CORE334,AIS: Race Theology and Place in Chicago, (4 Credits)| A theological investigation into Christianity and racial segregation in Chicago. This course explores the importance of geographical location for racial reconciliation, developing a vision for church unity rooted in place.
CORE335,AIS: The Holocaust and Contemporary Jewish Experience, (4 Credits)| Written and oral analysis of depictions of the Holocaust in various national literary and cinematic media and of contemporary Jewish authors in German-speaking countries; exploration of issues facing contemporary Jews in German-speaking Europe. Includes research paper.
CORE336,AIS: Energy for the Future, (4 Credits)| An examination of the science, history, and social impacts of energy generation and use in the U.S. and global contexts; Christian perspectives on personal and societal decision-making regarding future energy generation and use.
CORE337,AIS: Justice Law and Society, (4 Credits)| This course investigates traditions of thought on the nature of justice and law in society. It introduces students to general theories of jurisprudence and explores histories of legal traditions that are rooted in the ancient worlds of the Near East, Greece, and Israel and how they have influenced and differ from modern American contexts.
CORE338,AIS: The Physics of Sound, (4 Credits)| Basic concepts of sound and acoustics, including the following: vibrations, waves, instrument design, fundamentals and overtones, musical scales, harmony, noise, physical and physiological production, detection of sound waves, acoustical properties of materials and enclosures. Discussion and investigation of sound in the human context of psychology, physiology, neuroscience, and aesthetics, as well as how some areas of investigation of sound, such as human perception, are yet to be fully understood.
CORE339,AIS: Remembering Africa's Oral Past, (4 Credits)| This course equips students to both appreciate and analyze how intergenerational communities on the African continent have preserved knowledge of their pasts through sophisticated and emotive musical traditions. The course's focus on musical and other oral sources empowers students to access the historical knowledge of communities which chose to invest their intellectual energy in song and poetry rather than written text, while also equipping students to appreciate how beautiful and intellectually complex music and poetry flowed from the particular historical experiences of composers and performers in Africa. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Society (History) Cluster.
CORE341,Can Stress Promote Flourishing? The Effects of Stress on Brain and Behavior, (4 Credits)| The overall goal of this course is to help students understand how stress can promote flourishing. Students will gain a deeper understanding of the basics of brain function and how the brain manages the response to stressors, how stressors affect several aspects of behavior, and how to protect the brain from the negative effects of stressors. In addition, two underlying themes will emerge throughout the course, including a discussion on the nature of persons and the concept of both control and agency for the proper understanding of stress.
CORE342,AIS: Dante's Commedia as Poetry Philosophy and Theology, (4 Credits)| This course examines Dante's Commedia as an encyclopedia poem, a term that the Dante scholar Guiseppe Mazzotta has used to characterize the poem's educational ambitions. This is a poem with a deep intellectual program; it takes on many of the great philosophical and theological questions of its own time, and ours, too. What is the nature of the soul? What is just punishment? What is the highest good? Yet it does this not within the context of a philosophical treatise but an imaginative journey through the regions of the afterlife, taken by the poet himself. Our aim in this course is to analyze the poem in all of its overlapping dimensions - as a great poem of ideas, as a spiritual evaluation and testimony (a confession?), as a travelogues that doubles as a series of philosophical dialogues, as a mosaic of unforgettable images. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Faith and Reason (Philosophy) Cluster.
CORE343,AIS: Creation Care: Values and Virtues, (4 Credits)| An interdisciplinary consideration of philosophical thinking in the context of worldviews toward environmental issues and our relation to creation. The course will address historical and contemporary environmental issues in conjunction with values held in human-creation relationships historically and socially. Values held in Christian and non-Christian views and practices regarding the created world will be examined in light of the virtures that influence our awareness and responsive actions. Christian values and virtues in the context of Christian character will be considered relative to creation care. These considerations will cultivate academic and spiritual maturity by considering one's relationship to our Creator and creation. The course will also address theological underpinnings as they relate to the intersection of Christian faith and how one lives their life in light of a call to care for God's creation. BIOL 241 recommended. This course cannot meet the Legacy Gen Ed Studies in Faith and Reason (Philosophy) Cluster.
CORE344,AIS: Gender and Global Health, (4 Credits)| An interdisciplinary approach to using a gender lens to understand the global patterns of health and disease. While focusing on gendered inequalities, students in this course will describe and analyze how ecology, social class, and race interact with gender and impact the global burden of disease. Students will also consider how our Christian call to love our neighbor impacts our response to the disparities seen in the global burden of disease.
ECON211,Principles of Microeconomics, (4 Credits)| An introduction to economic ways of thinking. Resource allocation, production, and distribution mechanisms are explored. Counts as one of the Studies in Society legacy general education options.
ECON212,Principles of Macroeconomics, (2 Credits)| An examination of national income and product determination. Monetary and fiscal policy are analyzed as tools for dealing with inflation, unemployment, and economic growth. Prerequisite: ECON 211 (can be a co-requisite if ECON 212 taken during B quad).
ECON325,Intermediate Macroeconomics, (4 Credits)| A theoretical, institutional, and empirical study of national income distribution, inflation, unemployment, economic stability, and the rate of growth. Explores domestic and international macroeconomic policy issues. Examines the development of macroeconomic theories. Prerequisites: ECON 211, 212, and MATH 231 or 221.
ECON326,Intermediate Microeconomics, (4 Credits)| This course helps students develop a sound understanding of microeconomic analysis. The primary objective of the course is to study consumer and producer behavior and analyze their interactions in the market system from three dimensions: economic intuition, math, and graphs. Two themes of the course are economic decisions and economic institutions. The course will explore how various economic agents make choices, and the implications of these choices for the overall allocation of resources for society. The course then studies various market imperfections and their consequences for welfare. Prerequisites: ECON 211, 212, and MATH 231 or 221.
ECON345,Money & Banking, (4 Credits)| The course examines the nature of banks as financial intermediaries within the context of the financial services industry and the Federal Reserve System. The significance of money as an economic variable, and the relationship between money and banking are explored. The nature of a bank's portfolio of financial assets is studied from both a theoretical and applied perspective. Prerequisite: ECON 212. Majors only.
ECON346,Public Finance, (4 Credits)| This course examines the public sector and its policy process including voting models, expenditure, priorities, insurance programs, and taxation principles. Special attention is given to Social Security, health care, and welfare issues. Prerequisite: ECON 211; recommended ECON 212.
ECON347,Urban Economics, (4 Credits)| Examines issues relating to urban growth and public policy. Topics include urban housing, poverty, local government, labor market, transportation, education, crime, land-use controls and zoning, and economic development. Recommended: ECON 211.
ECON348,Economics of Competition, (4 Credits)| Examines the theoretical and empirical foundations of competition in economics. The course includes a review of the neoclassical economics of competition, introduces institutional and informational perspectives on competition. The course entails extensive readings of empirical studies highlighting the various forms of competition and addresses the strengths and weaknesses of alternative approaches to the study of competition. Prerequisites: ECON 211 and B EC 321 (or MATH 263 or MATH 363 or MATH 163 (AP Statistics credit)).
ECON361,Evolution of Global Economy, (4 Credits)| This class explores the nature and historical origins of economic globalization. When and how did people, technology, goods, and capital begin to flow so extensively across national borders, and what has been the impact of these flows on international economic development? These questions are approached chronologically, beginning with the pre-history of modern globalization before turning to the beginning of true globalization during the long 19th century. The second half of the course is devoted to understanding the chaotic first half of the 20th century, with an emphasis on the international Great Depression, and the reintegration of the world economy from the postwar period to the present. Throughout, students will learn to think analytically and empirically about key issues in economics and history, largely through reading primary economic research in journal articles and book chapters. Prerequisites: ECON 211, 212, and B EC 321 (or MATH 263 or MATH 363 or MATH 163 (AP Statistics credit)).
ECON362,Wealth & Poverty of Nations, (4 Credits)| This course explores one of the most important, long-running questions in economics: Why are some places so rich while others are so poor? In this course, students examine the causes of economic growth in the very long run. Looking back over the last several hundred, and in some cases several thousand, years, we search for the “deep determinants” of growth – how the fundamentals of geography and environment, along with changes in institutions, technology, and economic integration have allowed some, but not all, societies to prosper and provide their members with remarkably high standards of living. This process has accelerated rapidly among the economically developed countries over the last two hundred years, in what has been termed modern economic growth. Only in a long-run historical context can we adequately address the stark divergence between these countries and those who have remained poor. Throughout, students will learn to think analytically and rigorously about economic growth and development, largely through reading, discussing, and critiquing books and journal articles. Prerequisites: ECON 211, 212.
ECON364,Health Economics, (4 Credits)| This course uses the tools of economics to gain insight into health and health care issues in both the developed and developing world. Topics covered include: health production and the demand for health; health insurance and insurance markets; the role of government in health care; health interventions and challenges of health improvement in developing countries. At the end of the class, students should be able to apply economic paradigms to global health policy issues, and critically evaluate empirical evidence of what works and what doesn't. Prerequisite: ECON 326.
ECON365,Economic Growth & Development, (4 Credits)| This course provides a theoretical, institutional, and empirical study of human needs and economic development in the two-thirds world. It addresses numerous issues including employment, health, education, agriculture, sustainability, population, and globalization. This course teaches a systematic approach to economic policy analysis and applies it to the study of development and poverty alleviation efforts in poor countries. Prerequisite: ECON 211; recommended ECON 212, ECON 326.
ECON366,International Economics, (4 Credits)| Studies the theory of international trade and finance. Examines policy exchange rates issues including the balance of trade, economic integration, and international debt. Prerequisites: ECON 211, 212.
ECON374,Globalization, (4 Credits)| See IR 375
ECON375,Econometrics for Business and Economics, (4 Credits)| This is a course in applied econometrics. The course focuses on regression analysis as a research tool that economists and other social scientists use to estimate economic and social relationships and to test hypotheses about those relationships using real-world data. Topics include simple and multiple regression analysis, hypothesis testing, dummy variable techniques, specification tests, and instrumental variable analysis. Students will learn hands-on data analysis and model estimation, as well as the use of the econometric software STATA. Prerequisites: ECON 211 and B EC 321 (or MATH 263 or MATH 363 or MATH 163 (AP Statistics credit)); recommended ECON 326.
ECON376,Game Theory, (4 Credits)| This course introduces the basic concepts of game theory. Game theory is the study of strategic decision-making-that is, making decisions when individuals' actions affect each other. It is a powerful tool, applicable in a broad range of fields, from economics and business, to politics and law, and even biology. Firm competition, auctions, international conflict resolution, and animal mating behavior are all multi-agent decision problems; they are all games. Students learn how to recognize games, how to formally model their key properties, and how to predict outcomes based on concepts of equilibrium. Above all, students learn to think strategically with precision and rigor. Prerequisites: ECON 211 and MATH 231 or 221.
ECON378,Economics of Labor & Poverty, (4 Credits)| A theoretical and empirical application of microeconomics to the socioeconomic issues related to labor markets. Students will learn to evaluate social policies and programs with the rigor provided by theory and the evidence from empirical research. Topics include labor supply and demand, mobility, and wage differentials, with particular focus on human capital, discrimination, and poverty in the United States. Prerequisites: B EC 321, (or MATH 263 or MATH 363 or MATH 163 (AP Statistics credit)), and ECON 326.
ECON392,Topics in Economics, (2 Credits)| Selected topics designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of economics. Prerequisites: ECON 211, 212.
ECON394,Topics in Economics, (4 Credits)| Selected topics designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of economics. Prerequisites: ECON 211, 212.
ECON492,Senior Legacy Capstone, (2 Credits)| The Economics Capstone Seminar invites students to use what they have learned in their deep study of economics and their broad exploration of the liberal arts to engage with classics of the discipline. They will read and discuss seminal papers from several of the most influential economists. They will explore big economic questions from historical and contemporary perspectives. They will wrestle with complex and pressing current policy debates. And they will interact with visiting economists presenting their own current research Prerequisite: Senior standing; majors only. For Legacy Gen ed only.
ECON494,Seminar & Research, (4 Credits)| As an Economics Capstone Experience, the course allows students to pursue deep integration of economics and the concepts they have explored throughout the entire Christ at the Core curriculum. The structure for the course is split into the two broad components of seminar and research. In seminar, students are challenged to engage with selected texts from several of the most influential economists, to weigh in on current policy debates, and to reflect on and articulate their understanding of vocation and the liberal arts. The research component of the course requires students to develop a clear and concise research question, seek data supported responses to those questions, and to present their findings both through a formal paper and in class presentation. Prerequisites: Senior standing, majors only; ECON 375.
ECON495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Individual study on major issues for the advanced student with approval of the department chair. See Department guidelines.
ECON499,Honors Thesis, (4 Credits)| An independent research project requiring original research, developed into a scholarly paper and culminating in an oral examination. By application to the department only. The honors thesis may not be counted toward the total hours required to complete the major. Prerequisite: ECON 375.
EDUC135,School & Society, (2 Credits)| Introductory course to provide a broad exposure to the foundations of education in the United States through history, many aspects of culture and society, theoretical concepts, current issues, and their educational implications. Explores these topics through the lenses of the Education Department conceptual framework, Teaching and Leading for Human Flourishing, which includes embodying justice, making ethical and reasoned decisions, and acting in a Christ-like manner.
EDUC136,Teaching Ethnically and Linguistically Diverse Students, (2 Credits)| The theoretical and pedagogical background necessary to provide culturally and linguistically responsive learning experiences for a diverse student population. The course includes the English Language Development (ELD) Standards and English Language Proficiency (ELP) Standards of the World-Class Instructional Design and Assessment professional organization (WIDA). Co-requisite: EDUC 136L. B quad
EDUC136L,Cross-cultural Tutoring, (1 Credit)| A tutoring experience with students from cultural and linguistic settings different from that of the college student's background. Most of the assignments are arranged through the Christian Service Council. Concurrent with EDUC 136. Graded pass/fail.
EDUC201,U,S, Education Policy: Problems and Possibilities, (4 Credits)| This course has three primary purposes: 1) introduce today's major education policy issues in historical, social, and cultural contexts; 2) investigate the ways U.S. education policy questions are addressed at federal, state, and local levels with comparative analysis to other countries; and 3) develop oral and written skills in generating and recommending appropriate policy options and solutions as a Christian seeking to influence schools, society, and human flourishing. Topics include: comparative analysis of policy; executive, judicial, and legislative policy actions, motivation, and history; equity, standards, and accountability reforms; teachers and instructional quality; and access affordability, and persistence.
EDUC225,Learning and Development: The Psychological and Developmental Contexts of Education, (4 Credits)| Overview of the major theories, concepts, issues, data, and research methodologies used in understanding how children from birth through adolescence learn and grow. Various theories of learning are examined and the impact of typical growth stages on learning is assessed. Not open to freshmen without consent of instructor. Corequisite EDUC 225L or EDUC521L.
EDUC225L,Teacher Aiding Practicum, (1 Credit)| Thirty hours of field-based work observing and assisting a licensed teacher aiding experience in a local elementary, middle or high school and preparing a lesson to teach students in this context.during the semester. Concurrent with EDUC 225. Graded pass/fail.
EDUC305,Learning Differences, (2 Credits)| The theoretical and pedagogical background necessary to meet the requirements of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (I.D.E.A.) and its amendments, as well as the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, including Response to Intervention (RTI). It includes instruction in the psychology of children and adolescents with exceptionalities with emphases on students who are gifted, who have learning disabilities, and English language learners. It emphasizes identification of learning needs, individualization of educational programs, differentiation of instruction, and utilization of available services. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136; Pre or co-requisites EDUC 225 and EDUC 225L, or Department approval.
EDUC305L,Learning Differences Practicum, (1 Credit)| The candidate will observe and work with students with special needs in a school or recreational setting for approximately 30 hours. Corequisite with content-specific methods practicum or permission of instructor, EDUC 311L or 324L or MUMS 471L or 472L. Graded pass/fail.
EDUC306,Classroom Communication & Curriculum Integration, (4 Credits)| Covers the communication processes germane to the teaching profession, which include the development of techniques in speaking, writing, and reading skills. Includes methodologies for teaching reading and writing across the curriculum with particular emphasis in middle school curriculum, as well as theory and practice for interpersonal communications, listening skills, public speaking, and instructional strategies (lecturing, questioning techniques, group processes and dynamics). Concurrent with a methods of teaching course in the major, EDUC 324L, 305, and 305L. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, and admission to WheTEP.
EDUC308,Survey of Exceptional Children, (2 Credits)| The cognitive, emotional, social, physical, and motivational characteristics and educational requirements of exceptional children, focusing on students in K-12 settings. Exceptionalities at both ends of the continuum are examined. Required for Illinois Learning Behavior Specialist I endorsement. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305.
EDUC311,Theories and Methods of Teaching Elementary and Middle School Students, (2 Credits)| An introduction to general methods of teaching elementary and middle school students, including units on the nature and curriculum of elementary and middle schools, classroom management, lesson and unit planning, adapting instruction for individual differences, and assessment. Concurrent with EDUC 312, 311L, 315, 317, 305L, SSCI 321, SCI 322. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, MATH 125, and admission to WheTEP. Field trip fee.
EDUC311L,Methods Practicum for Elementary and Middle School, (1 Credit)| An opportunity to practice some of the concepts and skills acquired in methods courses. The elementary major works with a cooperating teacher over a several week period in the spring. Concurrent with appropriate methods courses. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, MATH 125, and admission to WheTEP. Graded pass/fail. $50 course fee.
EDUC312,Theories and Methods: Elementary and Middle School Reading, (4 Credits)| This course is designed to foster teacher candidates’ understanding of the theoretical, pedagogical, and research-based applications of effective reading instruction. Enables candidates to develop competencies necessary to design and implement comprehensive reading programs which include evidence-based strategies that meet the developmental reading needs of K-8 students of diverse backgrounds. Concurrent with EDUC 311, 311L, 315, 317, 305L, SSCI 321, SCI 322. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, MATH 125, and admission to WheTEP.
EDUC315,Theories and Methods of Teaching Elementary and Middle School Mathematics, (4 Credits)| The content, techniques, and strategies in the teaching of mathematics in the elementary and middle grades. Emphasis on philosophy and concepts of mathematics instruction based on the curriculum, professional, and assessment standards of NCTM and the Illinois Professional Teaching Standards, and the Common Core State Standards. Concurrent with EDUC 312, 311, 311L, 317, 305L, SSCI 321, SCI 322. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, MATH 125, and admission to WheTEP.
EDUC317,Theories and Methods of Teaching Elementary and Middle School Language Arts, (2 Credits)| The theoretical and pedagogical background for teaching language arts in the context of written and oral composition, handwriting, spelling, grammar, listening, poetry, and literature. Concurrent with EDUC 312, 311, 311L, 315, 305L, SSCI 321,SCI 322. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, MATH 125, and admission to WheTEP.
EDUC324L,Methods Practicum—Middle and High School, (1 Credit)| An opportunity to practice some of the concepts and skills acquired in methods courses. The secondary education major works with a cooperating teacher for 30 hours in half-day units during the fall or spring. Completed the semester prior to student teaching. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, and admission to WheTEP. Graded pass/fail. Course fee $50.
EDUC328,Cross-Categorical Characterist, (4 Credits)| Characteristics of Cross-Categorical Special Education. An overview of the field of cross-categorical special education and the K-12 students who are placed in cross-categorical settings. Required for Illinois Learning Behavior Specialist I endorsement. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, 308.
EDUC338,Methods of Teaching Cross-Categorical Special Education, (4 Credits)| The planning, instruction, and assessment required for students with individual educational plans, consistent with federal and state requirements relating to such practices as inclusion and Response to Intervention. Required for Illinois Learning Behavior Specialist I endorsement. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, 308, 328, and 328L.
EDUC341,Topics in Education, (2 or 4 Credits)| Specific topics in education not normally included in the curriculum. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, or consent of instructor.
EDUC348,Diagnosis and Assessment of Students with Disabilities, (4 Credits)| Study of the diagnostic assessments leading to eligibility for special education services as well as effective alternative and differentiated assessment strategies for students with disabilities. Required for Illinois Learning Behavior Specialist I endorsement. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, 308, 328, 328L, 338, 338L.
EDUC405L,Middle Grade Practicum, (1 Credit)| An optional teacher-aiding experience in the middle grades for a full-time, five-day period when the College is not in session, usually completed during the winter or spring break. Pre-approved middle grade projects required. Graded pass/fail.
EDUC494,Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| This course will examine the complexities of the teaching profession within the context of student teaching. Candidates will examine their experiences within the framework of readings which will inform their methods of teaching and effective interaction with students. The course will also demonstrate how research can be done within the classroom as a means to answering some of the questions which arise from their student teaching experience. Taken during the student teaching semester. Course fee $300.
EDUC495,Problems in Education, (1 to 4 Credits)| Problems in Education. Individual work with periodic conferences for candidates who have demonstrated ability and have definite interest in problems in a restricted field.
EDUC496,Student Teaching, (9 Credits)| This is an internship experience where candidates apply teaching principles in local schools and classrooms under supervision. Usually student teaching is done within a 15-mile radius of the campus. Candidates complete their student teaching in their major teaching areas. Concurrent with EDUC 497, 494.
EDUC497,Philosophical Foundations of Education, (3 Credits)| This course examines the philosophical foundations of education with an emphasis on a comparison of philosophical ideas in education and on the development of a personal philosophy of education related to one's calling and vocation. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 225, 225L, and admission to WheTEP. Concurrent with EDUC 494, 496. Course fee approximately $250.
EDUC498,Literacy Assessment, (2 Credits)| This course is designed to explore specific problems in the teaching of the language arts beyond those covered in EDUC 312. It deals with diagnosis and recommendations for providing supportive contexts for individual differences. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 312 (or equivalent), and admission to WheTEP or consent of instructor.
EDUC505L,Learning Differences Practicum, (0 Credits)| The candidate will observe and work with students with special needs in a school or recreational setting for approximately 30 hours. Concurrent with EDUC 511L or EDUC 527L. Graded pass/fail.
EDUC506,Classroom Communication and Curriculum Integration, (4 Credits)| Covers the communication processes germane to the teaching profession, which include the development of techniques in speaking, writing, and reading skills. Includes methodologies for teaching reading and writing across the curriculum with particular emphasis in middle school curriculum, as well as theory and practice for interpersonal communications, listening skills, public speaking, and instructional strategies (lecturing, questioning techniques, group processes and dynamics).. Prerequisites: EDUC 515L, 225, 521L, and admission to WheTEP and M.A.T. program.
EDUC507L,Middle Grade Practicum, (0 Credits)| An optional teacher-aiding experience in the middle grades for a full-time, five-day period when the College is not in session, usually completed during the winter or spring break. Pre-approved middle grade projects required. Graded pass/fail.
EDUC511,Theories and Methods of Teaching Elementary and Middle School Students, (2 Credits)| An introduction to general methods of teaching elementary and middle school students, including units on the nature and curriculum of elementary and middle schools, classroom management, lesson and unit planning, adapting instruction for individual differences, and assessment. Additional study for graduate students includes professional and political roles of teaching. Concurrent with EDUC 312, 315, 317, 505L, 511L, SCI 322, SSCI 321. Prerequisites: EDUC 136L/515L, 225, 225L/521L, EDUC 305, MATH 125, admission to the M.A.T. program, and admission to WheTEP $15 field trip fee.
EDUC511L,Methods Practicum for Elementary and Middle School, (0 Credits)| This field experience will provide an opportunity to integrate theory and practice through observation and use of the concepts and strategies developed in the professional block of methods courses and to understand the culture of elementary and middle schools through observation in various school settings and an additional extended full-time experience within a particular school setting. The elementary M.A.T. major works with a cooperating teacher over a four-week period in the spring. Concurrent with EDUC 312, 315, 317, 505L, 511, SCI 322, SSCI 321. Prerequisites: EDUC 136L/515L, 225, 225L/521L, 305, MATH 125, admission to the M.A.T. program, and admission to WheTEP. Graded pass/fail. Course fee: $50.
EDUC515L,Cross-Cultural Tutoring Practicum, (0 Credits)| A tutoring experience with students from cultural settings different from that of the graduate student’s background. Graded pass/fail.
EDUC521L,Teaching Aiding Practicum, (0 Credits)| Thirty hours of field-based work observing and assisting a licensed teacher in a local elementary, middle or high school and preparing a lesson to teach in this context. Concurrent with EDUC 225. Graded pass/fail.
EDUC527L,Secondary and Middle Education Practicum, (0 Credits)| A practice of the concepts and skills acquired in the departmental methods course. Concurrent with departmental methods class, EDUC 305, 305L. Prerequisite: Admission to WheTEP and the M.A.T. program. Graded pass/fail. Course fee $50.
EDUC529,Literacy Assessment, (2 Credits)| This course is designed to explore specific problems in the teaching of the language arts beyond those covered in EDUC 312. It deals with diagnosis and recommendations for providing supportive contexts for individual differences. Prerequisites: EDUC 587, 594, 596.
EDUC531,Ethical Perspectives on Teaching, (2 Credits)| An examination of ethical issues related to education, such as value conflicts between cultural groups, the nature of democracy in schools, allocation of limited resources, and implications of curricular decisions applicable to the candidate’s area of teaching. . Prerequisite: Admission to M.A.T. program.
EDUC541,Statistics in Education, (2 Credits)| A study of the techniques needed for understanding, analyzing, and interpreting data with an emphasis on descriptive and inferential statistics including correlational, t-test, and analysis of variance. . Prerequisite: Admission to M.A.T. program.
EDUC542,Research Methodologies in Education, (2 Credits)| The study and application of skills used in preparing, executing, reporting, and utilizing educational research in order to become critical consumers and producers of research. Candidate designs a curricular project that can be used during the induction year of teaching. Prerequisites: Admission to M.A.T. program.
EDUC587,Philosophical Foundations of Education, (3 Credits)| An examination of the philosophical foundations of education from 1635 to the present. Emphasis is on a comparison of philosophical ideas in education and on the development of a personal philosophy of education. Candidate studies literature of a chosen educational theorist. Concurrent with EDUC 594 and 596. Prerequisites: EDUC 515L, 225, 521L, and admission to M.A.T. program. Course fee approx. $250.
EDUC594,Craft Of Teaching, (2 Credits)| An exploration of the complexities of the teaching profession within the context of student teaching. Candidates will examine their experiences within the framework of readings which will inform their methods of teaching and effective interaction with students. The course will also demonstrate how research can be done within the classroom as a means to answering some of the questions which arise from the student teaching experience. Focus is on implementing classroom research. Concurrent with EDUC 587 and 596. Prerequisite: Admission to M.A.T. program. Course fee: $300
EDUC595,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| 
EDUC596,Student Teaching, (9 Credits)| A twelve-week teaching internship focusing on the candidate’s major area of scholarship and beginning classroom research. Usually student teaching is done within a 15-mile radius of the campus. Candidates complete their student teaching in their major teaching areas. Concurrent with EDUC 587, 594.
EDUC598,Action Reserch Paper, (2 Credits)| A research paper focusing on an area of scholarship based on on-site experience. The candidate defines, designs, and implements an original classroom research project. Prerequisites: Admission to M.A.T. program, EDUC 541, 542, 594, 596.
EDUC599,Action Research Continuation, (0 Credits)| See M.A. Thesis/Applied Thesis/Action Research.
EDUC698,Thesis, (4 Credits)| 
EDUC699,Thesis Continuation, (0 Credits)| See M.A. Thesis/Applied Thesis/Action Research.
ENGR101,Introduction to the Engineering Profession, (1 Credit)| Introduces students to the engineering profession. The engineering disciplines, problem solving approaches, design processes, professional practices, licensure, engineering ethics, and teamwork will be explored through discussion, reading, research, and guest visits by practicing engineers. The importance of the liberal arts and the impact of faith on the practice of engineering will be explored. Freshmen and sophomores only.
ENGR105,Fundamentals of Engineering Graphics, (2 Credits)| Introduces students to engineering graphics, the means by which engineers communicate design and fabrication information. Topics cover: utilization of engineering graphics; information on graphics; use of the basic graphic tools; orthographic views in both third and first angle projections; auxiliary, section, isometric, and perspective views. This course acquaints students with the processes that are automated within Computer Aided Drafting and Design (CADD) software and expectations for CADD work product. Lab fee. (lin)
ENGR125,Introduction to AutoCAD, (2 Credits)| Intro to AutoCAD with emphasis on the fundamentals of Computer-Aided Drafting and Design (CADD). Introduces concepts, techniques and procedures necessary to facilitate a basic functional understanding of AutoCAD and the process of using AutoCAD tools to create, dimension, and annotate basic engineering drawings. Lab fee. (lin)
ENGR201,Engineering Mechanics 1 - Statics, (4 Credits)| Systems of units; gravitation; Newton’s laws of motion; equilibrium and free-body diagrams; particles, forces and moments; structures in equilibrium; centroids and center of mass; moments of inertia; friction; beam loadings; cables; fluids; virtual work and potential energy; particle kinematics; and, rotating bodies. Prerequisites: MATH 231 and PHYS 231.
ENGR202,Engineering Mechanics 11 – Dynamics, (4 Credits)| Topics include: kinematics and kinetics of particles; Newton’s laws of motion; energy, momentum, systems of particles; rigid bodies; free-body diagrams; mass, acceleration, and force; plane motion of rigid bodies; and, conservation of energy and momentum. Prerequisite: ENGR 201. Pre or Corequisite: MATH 333.
ENGR204,Innovative Design in Engineering, (4 Credits)| Provides the student engineer with firsthand experience in moving from a stated need to a developed and proof-tested product. Topics include project logbooks and plans, evaluating concepts and selecting a design, preparing design documents, fabrication, development and testing of prototypes, stewardship of the environment, preparation of engineering reports, and principles of contract, engineering, and patent law. Prerequisites: ENGR 201.
ENGR223,Strength of Materials, (4 Credits)| Provides a broad range of knowledge of the behavior of materials under load. Topics include: mechanical properties; plane stress and strain; stress and strain relations; axially loaded members; Mohr's circle; stress transformation; torsion of shafts; bending and normal and shear stresses in beams; beam deflection; and combined loading. Prerequisite: ENGR 201.
ENGR225,Materials Science, (4 Credits)| Presents the scientific principles underlying the structural analysis of ceramic, composite, metallic (including semiconductors), and polymeric materials. Topics include atomic bonding and structure, electronic structure, micro- and macrostructure. Principles of structural effects on the chemical, mechanical, and physical properties of material are also addressed. Prerequisite: CHEM 231.
ENGR394,Engineering Ethics Capstone, (2 Credits)| Engineering ethics and vocation; connections between the liberal arts educational experience and the practice of engineering. Prerequisite: Junior standing in the major. Seminar format meeting once per week for the full semester. (lin)
ENG271,History of English Language, (2 Credits)| A study of the development of the English language with attention given to an understanding of semantics, syntax, morphology, phonology, and diversity in language use. Required of all English majors seeking secondary education licensure. Offered in alternate years.
ENG324,Methods of Teaching High School English, (2 Credits)| Content will focus on teaching English Language Arts at the high school level and will address the issues of planning, teacher/student interaction, literacy skills, pedagogy for various genres of literature, technology and instructional aids, assessment and grading procedures. Required of English majors pursuing middle school and high school licensure, prior to student teaching. Open to all English majors interested in teaching. Corequisite: ENG 325. Prerequisite: Acceptance to the Wheaton Teacher Education Program (WheTEP) or the instructor’s approval.
ENG325,Methods of Teaching Middle School English, (2 Credits)| Content will focus on teaching English Language Arts at the middle school level and will address the issues of planning, teacher/student interaction, literacy skills, pedagogy for various genres of literature, technology and instructional aids, assessment and grading procedures. Required of English majors pursuing middle school and high school licensure, prior to student teaching. Open to all English majors interested in teaching. Corequisite: ENG 324. Prerequisite: Acceptance to the Wheaton Teacher Education Program (WheTEP) or the instructor’s approval.
ENG429,Problems in Reading, (2 Credits)| Literacy Assessment. See EDUC 498.
ENGL102,Modern Western Literature, (2 Credits)| A survey of modern western literature with emphasis on genres prominent in the 19th and 20th centuries.
ENGL111,Studies in Western Literature, (4 Credits)| An introduction to Western literature for non-majors that equips students for life-long learning by teaching them the skills of literary study. Students will investigate enduring or perennial questions of Western literature and culture, including what comprises a classic or canonical text, in the context of either 1) a focused investigation of an influential period or author(s) or 2) a survey of texts that are joined by genre or central theme(s). The course will develop students' abilities to apply close-reading practices; to situate their interpretations within relevant literary, historical, biographical and/or cultural contexts and traditions; and to employ genre conventions in their writing. Across the semester, students will also reflect on the readings' harmony with and dissonance from Christian theological traditions, as well as the value of reading literature for the Christian life.
ENGL112,Studies in Western Literature: Comedy and Tragedy, (4 Credits)| An introduction to Western literature (specifically the genres of comedy and tragedy) for non-majors that equips students for life-long learning by teaching them the skills of literary study. Students will investigate enduring or perennial questions of Western literature and culture, including what comprises a classic or canonical text, in the context of either 1) a focused investigation of an influential period or author(s) or 2) a survey of texts that are joined by genre or central theme(s). The course will develop students' abilities to apply close-reading practices; to situate their interpretations within relevant literary, historical, biographical and/or cultural contexts and traditions; and to employ genre conventions in their writing. Across the semester, students will also reflect on the readings' harmony with and dissonance from Christian theological traditions, as well as the value of reading literature for the Christian life.
ENGL115,Topics in Modern Global Literature, (4 Credits)| An introduction to diverse literatures since 1700. Students will track literary conversations, concerns, and historical events and other phenomena that interconnect people across geopolitical borders. The particular regions and literary genres covered depend upon the course theme.
ENGL202,Topics in Literary Explorations and Global Perspectives, (4 Credits)| This course, which will exist in numerous topical instantiations, is designed to facilitate students' substantive engagement with global culture through an exploration of the formal and generic elements of literature. Within a sustained focus on analyzing multiple examples of literature of at least one cultural group outside the Anglo/AngloAmerican context within its historical/cultural context, students will practice literary and cultural analysis with an aim of illuminating not only the literature and culture, but also the students' Christian theological understanding and personal response to the literature and culture.
ENGL215,Classical and Early British Literature, (4 Credits)| An overview of Classical and early British literature, introducing students to major eras, authors, and genres through the sixteenth-century.
ENGL225,Topical Seminar, (4 Credits)| A topical seminar that introduces students to terms and techniques of literary analysis, important questions within the discipline, and the research process. Pre-requisite: ENGL 215
ENGL226,Topical Seminar: Shakespeare, (4 Credits)| A topical seminar that introduces students to terms and techniques of literary analysis, important questions within the discipline, and the research process. This course will focus on William Shakespeare. Required for students seeking teacher licensure. Pre-requisite: ENGL 215
ENGL285,Topics in Global Literature, (2 Credits)| An introductory survey of a literature outside the Western tradition, e.g. the literature of Africa, Latin America, India, or the Far East (China and/or Japan). Legacy diversity course.
ENGL326,Children's Literature, (2 Credits)| A chronological survey by genre of books written for children, preschool through grade six. (Does not count toward general education requirement or English major.)
ENGL328,Young Adult Literature, (4 Credits)| Critical analysis and evaluation of contemporary novels for adolescents in grades six through twelve. At least half of the novels discussed in this course will be works outside the Anglo/Anglo American context. (Does not count toward general education requirement. Counts toward the 40 hr. minimum only for teaching concentration students.)
ENGL331,Medieval Literature, (4 Credits)| Representative major genres of the Middle Ages, including, Arthurian romance, drama, lyric, and frame narrative with a focus on the works of Chaucer
ENGL336,The English Renaissance, (4 Credits)| The chief literary works of the sixteenth century in their English setting, with emphasis on More, Marlowe, Sidney, Spenser, and Kyd.
ENGL337,Seventeenth-Century English Literature, (4 Credits)| The metaphysical and Cavalier traditions of poetry, the work of Milton, and a sampling of prose traditions.
ENGL338,Restoration and Eighteenth-Century Literature, (4 Credits)| Major British writers from 1660 to 1789, including Aphra Behn, Jonathan Swift, Samuel Johnson, and Laurence Sterne. Readings will provide an understanding of literary developments such as Neoclassicism, the Novel the culture of Sensibility, and the Gothic.
ENGL341,American Literature: Beginnings through Romanticism, (4 Credits)| Early American literature from the writings of exploration and colonization through Romanticism. Writers may include Edwards, Franklin, Douglass, Emerson, Thoreau, Whitman, Melville, Hawthorne, Dickinson.
ENGL342,American Literature: Realism to Modernism, (4 Credits)| Literature from the Civil War to the Great Depression. Writers may include Twain, Wharton, Chopin, Dreiser, Frost, Eliot, Hemingway, Fitzgerald. Legacy diversity course.
ENGL343,American Literature after 1945, (4 Credits)| Writers discussed may include Baldwin, O’Connor, Miller, Kerouac, DeLillo, Carver, Levertov, Morrison, Cisneros, Wilbur, Robinson. Legacy diversity course.
ENGL355,The Romantic Period, (4 Credits)| Major English Romantic writers, 1783-1832, together with a study of the meaning of Romanticism. Includes Jane Austen.
ENGL361,Victorian Literature, (4 Credits)| The poetry, fiction, prose, and drama of the Victorian era (1832-1901), including major works of Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Hopkins, the Brontës, Dickens, Eliot, Hardy, Carlyle, Ruskin, and the Pre-Raphaelites
ENGL364,British Modernism: 1900-1939, (4 Credits)| An exploration of some of the key authors and themes of 20th century British Literature, with particular emphasis on High Modernism: Joyce, Yeats, Woolf, and their contemporaries.
ENGL365,British Literature after 1939, (4 Credits)| An exploration of some of the major authors and themes in the literature of the British Isles since the end of World War II.
ENGL371,Modern European Literature, (4 Credits)| Poetry, fiction, drama, and non-fiction prose from 1850 to the present. Writers may include Flaubert, Dostoevsky, Ibsen, Mann, Kafka, Bonhoeffer, Mandelstam, Levi, Mulisch, Dinesen, and Milosz.
ENGL373,Literature of the Bible, (4 Credits)| The literary forms and meaning of biblical literature.
ENGL375,Women Writers, (2 Credits)| A study of major women novelists, essayists, poets, and playwrights from the Middle Ages to the present. Legacy diversity course.
ENGL378,Studies in Literary Genre, (4 Credits)| Each offering of this course will investigate one of the major literary genres-novel, epic, tragedy, lyric, drama, essay, and so on-investigating its characteristic features and tracing its development over time.
ENGL379,African-American Literature, (4 Credits)| A survey of the African American literary tradition from Phillis Wheatley and the slave narratives to Toni Morrison. Other writers include Chesnutt, Hurston, Hughes, Wright, Baldwin, Baraka, and Clifton. Legacy diversity course.
ENGL381,American Literature in Focus: Beginnings Through Romanticism, (2 Credits)| In-depth study of an author or authors, movement, genre, or theme in American literature from its beginnings through romanticism. (2 hour parallel to ENGL 341.)
ENGL382,American Literature in Focus: Realism to Modernism, (2 Credits)| In-depth study of an author or authors, movement, genre, or theme in American literature from from Realism through Modernism in American literature. (2 hour parallel to ENGL 342.)
ENGL383,American Literature in Focus: After 1945, (2 Credits)| In-depth study of an author or authors, movement, genre, or theme in American literature after 1945. (2 hour parallel to ENGL 343.)
ENGL384,Shakespeare, (4 Credits)| The major comedies and tragedies, along with selective study of the history plays and romances.
ENGL385,Selected Authors, (2 Credits)| In-depth study of a single author or a small number of authors.
ENGL386,Selected Authors, (4 Credits)| In-depth study of a single author or a small number of authors.
ENGL387,C,S, Lewis and J,R,R, Tolkien, (4 Credits)| In this course, we will study the works of two 20th century English writers - Clive Staples Lewis and John Ronald Reuel Tolkien. During our time on Wheaton's campus, we will take advantage of the Marion E. Wade Center's wonderful collections, preparing for our studies in England by conducting research on Lewis' and Tolkien's scholarship and by beginning to investigate the many contexts (e.g., historical, literary, theological, intellectual, cultural) in which they wrote. During our time in England, we will deepen our understanding of the relationships among these figures, their works, their beliefs, and the places that they inhabited. We will tour the colleges where they worked, walk in the gardens where they discussed mythology and belief, enjoy a meal at their favorite pub, attend their churches, and visit their gravesites. A central concern of our course will be to consider the relationship between the real and the fantastic, but we will also take up questions of joy and sorrow, place and power, and faith and fellowship as we travel there and back again. Corequisite: Participation in Wheaton in England.
ENGL388,Jane Austen in Her Time and Ours, (4 Credits)| An in-depth study of Jane Austen's novels that places them within the political, social and cultural contexts of late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century England. As students explore Austen's novels in this course, they will develop their abilities to analyze literary works through close reading, to situate their interpretations within relevant contexts, and to explore enduring questions as they reflect on how Austen's ideas interact with Christian theological traditions. They will also develop their abilities to critically analyze historical sources, interpret the past using sound historical reasoning, and articulate connections between historical investigation and Christian conviction and practice as they explore the complexities of England during this time period.
ENGL391,American Literature in Focus: Beginnings through Romanticism, (4 Credits)| In-depth study of an author or authors, movement, genre, or theme in American literature from its beginnings through romanticism. (4 hour parallel to ENGL 341.)
ENGL392,American Literature in Focus: Realism to Modernism, (4 Credits)| In-depth study of an author or authors, movement, genre, or theme in American literature in the period from Realism through Modernism in American literature. (4 hour parallel to ENGL 342.)
ENGL393,American Literature in Focus: After 1945, (4 Credits)| In-depth study of an author or authors, movement, genre, or theme in American literature after 1945. (4 hour parallel to ENGL 343.)
ENGL415,The Archaeology of Texts: Bibliographical Investigations, (4 Credits)| An exploration of the overlapping fields of bibliography, textual criticism, and book history as they have developed in the last pne hundred years. Students will both read landmark works within these fields and undertake hands-on applications of the theories that they encounter in readings.
ENGL431,Christianity and Fantasy, (4 Credits)| An exploration of the complex interrelations of Christianity and the fantastic, primarily in 20th century literature. Authors studied may include George MacDonald, G.K. Chesterton, J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Ursula K. Le Guin, John Crowley, Salman Rushdie, Susanna Clarke, and Neil Gaiman.
ENGL433,Varied Literary Topics, (2 or 4 Credits)| Selected topics, studied with a view to giving added breadth and depth to the understanding of special areas of literature. Where appropriate, this course may be substituted for listed requirements.
ENGL434,Modern Literary Theory, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the most influential modern theories about what literature is and how we experience it, with particular emphasis on deconstruction, feminism, New Historicism, and post-colonial criticism.
ENGL435,History of Literary Criticism, (4 Credits)| Key documents in the history of Western thought about literature, from Plato's banishment of the poets to the advent of Modernism. Other authors studied include Aristotle, Augustine, Dante, Sidney, Kant, Coleridge, Arnold, Nietzsche, and Marx.
ENGL485,Studies in Wade Center/Special Collections Authors, (2 Credits)| An in-depth study of a single author or a small number of authors included in the Wade Center and/or in Buswell's Special Collections. Students will be introduced to archival research as they explore authors such as C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, G.K. Chesterton, Dorothy L. Sayers, Charles Williams, George MacDonald, and Owen Barfield. (Open to Majors only, does not count for general education.)
ENGL486,Studies in Wade Center/Special Collections Authors, (4 Credits)| An in-depth study of a single author or a small number of authors included in the Wade Center and/or in Buswell's Special Collections. Students will be introduced to archival research as they explore authors such as C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, G.K. Chesterton, Dorothy L. Sayers, Charles Williams, George MacDonald, and Owen Barfield. (Open to Majors only, does not count for general education.)
ENGL494,Senior Seminar in English, (4 Credits)| Selected subjects, such as a group of writers, a literary form, or a theme, studied with a view to critical concerns and the integration of Christ at the Core experiences in literary study. Includes vocational component.
ENGL495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| An individually planned program of reading, research, and consultation under the supervision of a member of the department.
ENGL496,Literature Internship, (1 to 4 Credits)| English Department approval. Graded pass/fail.
ENGL499,Honors Thesis, (4 Credits)| An independent scholarly project requiring original research and culminating in an oral defense. By application only.
ENGW103,First Year Writing: Composition and Research, (4 Credits)| First Year Writing equips students to grow as writers in the Wheaton College classroom and beyond. The course is designed to prepare students to write effectively in a variety of social contexts and to improve student learning and performance in many other facets of their undergraduate education.
ENGW104,First Year Writing: Composition and Research, (2 Credits)| First Year Writing equips students to grow as writers in the Wheaton College classroom and beyond. The course is designed to prepare students to write effectively in a variety of social contexts and to improve student learning and performance in many other facets of their undergraduate education. Credit not given in addition to ENGW 103. Prerequisite: placement test scores as stated under General Education Requirements.
ENGW213,Creative Writing, (4 Credits)| Practice in a variety of literary forms, with emphasis on the development of tone and style. Prerequisite: completion of general education writing requirement.
ENGW214,Rhetorical Writing, (2 Credits)| Practice in a variety of essay forms, with emphasis on the development of a polished prose style. Prerequisite: completion of general education writing requirement.
ENGW233,Writing Chicago, (4 Credits)| This course engages the literature of Chicago writers and supports students as they work on their own academic, creative, and/or community-based writing projects. LE
ENGW332,Creative Non-Fiction, (4 Credits)| Practice combined with a study of the literary essay. Prerequisite: ENGW 213 or ENGW 214 or permission of the instructor.
ENGW333,Writing for Social Change, (4 Credits)| Explores writing as a means of social action and supports students as they write with and for one another, their communities, and members of local organizations and institutions. Pre-requisite: completion of at least one 200 level writing course (2-4), unless specified by the instructor.
ENGW335,Poetry Writing and Criticism, (4 Credits)| Practice combined with a study of modern and contemporary poetry. Prerequisite: ENGW 213 or permission of the instructor.
ENGW336,Fiction Writing and Criticism, (4 Credits)| Practice combined with a study of modern and contemporary fiction. Prerequisite: ENGW 213. For English majors or with permission of the instructor.
ENGW444,Special Topics in Writing, (2 or 4 Credits)| Selected topics or genres, studied with a view to giving added breadth and depth to the understanding of special areas of writing. Open to writing concentration students or with permission of the instructor. Prerequisite: completion of at least one 200-level writing course.
ENGW471,Composition Theory Practice and Pedagogy, (4 Credits)| A survey of composition theory, grammar, and approaches to the teaching of writing, along with extensive practice in expository writing. Required for English majors pursuing secondary education licensure, prior to student teaching. Open to English majors interested in teaching writing and elementary education majors with a language arts concentration (with the instructor's approval). Prerequisites: completion of general education writing requirement and junior status.
ENGW494,Senior Seminar in Writing, (4 Credits)| Selected subjects or genres in writing, studied with a view to critical and professional concerns and the integration of faith and learning in issues of writing. Open only to writing concentration students.
ENGW495,Writing Projects, (1 to 4 Credits)| Writing Projects.
ENGW496,Writing Internship, (1 to 4 Credits)| English Department approval. Graded pass/fail.
ENVR221,Living in the Environment: An Introduction to Environmental Science, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the historical and contemporary problems and dilemmas faces as humans live in and interact with the environment. The scientific basis, cultural causes, social implications, ethical dimensions, and avenues for constructive response are addressed. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Lab fee and field trip fee.
ENVR315,Nature Environment & Society, (4 Credits)| An exploration of contemporary environmental issues and problems. The understanding of the natural world will support the analysis of the role of society in creating, perpetuating and addressing these challenges. The role of personal and cultural responsibility for stewarding the natural environment will be emphasized. Field and classroom investigations will focus on the Black Hills context. Lab fee $50.
ENVR319,Environmental Ethics, (4 Credits)| A survey and analysis of major scientific problems and foundational philosophies underlying contemporary environmental ethics and the application of environmental ethics to the scientific and professional practice of conservation and environmental stewardship in scientific research, personal decision making, and professional environmental management. Prerequisite: Lab science course; counts as upper division science requirement under legacy gen ed only.
ENVR325,The Global Commons: International Issues in Environmental Science, (4 Credits)| An examination of environmental issues and challenges around the globe. The scientific principles needed to understand and characterize the problems will be covered as well as the economic, political, historical and cultural factors that drive the development of the problems. Attention will be given to integrated and holistic approaches to addressing environmental challenges. Prerequisite: SP course.
ENVR341,Quantitative Methods for Environmental Analysis and Problem Solving, (4 Credits)| Mathematical approaches to quantitatively describe, analyze, and understand environmental processes. Descriptive and inferential statistical techniques and numeric modeling are used to address environmental problems. Emphasis is on applications of the methods to practical problems and the use of computer resources. Three lectures, two hours laboratory.
ENVR381,Environmental Pollution and Toxicology, (4 Credits)| A study of the sources, environmental and human health impacts, and regulatory and engineering control of environmental pollution. Air pollutants, surface and groundwater pollutants, solid waste and hazardous waste will be covered. Human health impacts will be studied from a toxicologic and epidemiology basis. Measurement techniques will be covered in lab sessions. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Lab fee. Prerequisite: Laboratory science (SP) course.
ENVR391,Environmental Modeling, (4 Credits)| Increasingly models are used to understand and solve environmental processes and systems and to aid in environmental management. The course will introduce students to a variety of modeling methods (e.g. physical/mathematical, discrete/continuous, finite difference/finite element, stochastic/deterministic) and give environmental examples from the geological, biological, climatological, and socio-politico-economic fields. Students will analyze a problem and determine which type of model is appropriate and then proceed to construct the model. They will evaluate existing models with respect to boundary conditions, input, resolution, numerical stability, and appropriateness of assumptions. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: ENVR 341. Alternate years.
ENVR395,Independent Studies in Environmental Science, (2 to 4 Credits)| Field, laboratory and literature research under faculty direction. Application of data gathering and analysis methods. Communication of results in multiple formats. Prerequisite: Instructor approval.
ENVR421,Basic Applications in Agronomy, (4 Credits)| A survey of concepts and methods in crop science. Subject matter is intended to provide background for domestic, as well as international interests. Topics in lecture and lab include agricultural ecology, forestry, food-crop production, and growth optimization in various environments. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Prerequisites: introductory biology lab course, ENVR 221, or permission of the instructor.
ENVR431,Introduction to Environmental and Geotechnical Engineering, (4 Credits)| A survey of concepts and problem solving involving the interaction of people and earth systems. Subject matter is intended to provide background for domestic, as well as international interests. Topics in lecture and lab include basic systems analysis, energy, pollution abatement, water systems, construction criteria, and testing/utilization of earth materials. Three lectures, three hours laboratory. Lab fee $50. Prerequisites: ENVR 221 and (ENVR 341 or PHYS 221 or PHYS 231) or permission of the instructor. Alternate years.
ENVR494,Environmental Studies Capstone, (2 Credits)| A culminating experience for environmental science students' college career. Topics from across the breadth of the curriculum are integrated with environmental issues. Students explore the role of their liberal arts education and the practice of environmental stewardship as part of a personal and professional vocation. Prerequisites: ENVR 495 or 496, or permission of instructor.
ENVR495,Environmental Science Research, (2 to 4 Credits)| Field, laboratory, or library research involving selection of a research problem, review of appropriate professional literature, completion of data collection and analysis, and preparation of one or more professional papers submitted for presentation or publication in an appropriate professional venue. Requires direct supervision and mentoring by the program director of Environmental Science or faculty approved by the director.
ENVR496,Environmental Science Internship, (2 to 4 Credits)| An extended and concentrated experience in research, management, or education in environmental science under approved professional supervision and college guidelines. Prerequisites: Sophomore standing or higher and approval by the program director of Environmental Science.
ENVR497,Environmental and Conservation Science Research Seminar, (1 Credit)| A weekly seminar featuring presentations of on-going primary research on problems of environmental and conservation studies in the natural and social sciences. Graded pass/fail. One hour per week. Prerequisites: Sophomore standing or higher.
EVAN516,Spiritual Formation, (2 Credits)| Spiritual Formation and Witness. See INTR 514.
EVAN526,Gospel: Theological Perspectives on Evangelism and Renewal, (4 Credits)| Examines the gospel as the good news of God's inaugurated kingdom, with a focus on the centrality of Jesus' death and resurrection as interpretive center. Investigates the dynamic of the spread of this good news throughout Scripture and history. Explores more recent movements of renewal and revival in relation to issues of evangelism and social transformation.
EVAN534,Apologetics in Global Contexts, (2 Credits)| Examines apologetics as the study and practice of establishing the plausibility of the Christian faith within particular cultures and contexts. Explores various philosophical and cultural frameworks for apologetics and then applies them to modernist, postmodern, multi-ethnic and global contexts and questions.
EVAN542,Church: Movements & Models, (4 Credits)| Explores different paradigms and models of church, paying special attention to the most recent emerging missional movements and their characteristics, impact and trajectory. Includes field trip visits and guest lecturers representing various existing models of churches and ministries. Assesses ministries using a number of different evaluative tools that are widely used. Fee $30.
EVAN545,Culture: Emerging & Global, (4 Credits)| Explores the shape of ministry and evangelism in postmodern, post-Christendom and globalizing cultures. Examines popular culture in the U.S. as a key context for ministry and a critical influence around the world. Reframes evangelism, apologetics, preaching, healing, and discipleship in relation to the significant cultural shifts that are occurring.
EVAN546,Discipleship, (2 Credits)| See CFM 532.
EVAN547,Evangelistic Communication, (2 Credits)| Exposes students to the dynamics of communication and communication theory, with application to the task of communicating the gospel in contemporary contexts. The theological, conceptual, and practical role of media, drama, the arts, metaphor, and symbol will also be explored.
EVAN548,Evangelism and the Local Church, (4 Credits)| Explores the theology, strategies, practice, and leadership styles associated with implementing evangelism through a variety of ecclesiological traditions and local church settings.
EVAN556,Leadership and Evangelism, (2 Credits)| Examines the literature on personal leadership development, biblically and in contemporary contexts, with application to the task of leading the church or Christian agencies into evangelistic effectiveness. Special attention is given to devise or revise the mission and vision of a Christian organization seeking to be missional.
EVAN558,Personal Development and Leadership, (4 Credits)| Examines the theological, theoretical, and practical foundations for leadership in relation to personal development, stages of development over the life cycle, spiritual disciplines, personal witness, and the leader’s relational skills and practices.
EVAN559,Organizational and Change Leadership, (4 Credits)| Explores the processes, stages, and leadership capacities and skills for leading change in organizations. Examines biblical and theological perspectives on leadership, organizations and change. Introduces principles of social entrepreneurship. Equips students for leading churches and organizations toward becoming missional and evangelistic.
EVAN573,Evangelism Research Methods, (2 Credits)| Equips students with the rationale and methodology of qualitative research in cultural contexts, with an emphasis on the application of qualitative methods to a specific context through research projects.
EVAN691,Ministry Practicum, (2 Credits)| Provides practical, guided ministry experience in which students serve under supervision with regular interaction and instruction in the area of ministry. Graded pass/fail.
EVAN692,Comprehensive Exam, (0 Credits)| Prerequisite: submission of Candidacy form. Graded pass/fail.
EVAN694,Seminar In Evangelism, (2 or 4 Credits)| In-depth study of selected topics growing out of special concerns of professors and students.
EVAN695,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| 
EVAN696,Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| Graded pass/fail.
EVAN698,Thesis/Applied Thesis, (2 or 4 Credits)| 
EVAN699,Thesis/Applied Thesis Contin, (0 Credits)| See M.A. Thesis/Applied Thesis/Action Research.
FREN101,Elementary French I, (4 Credits)| Beginning French with emphasis on listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Laboratory work. Cannot receive credit for both (FREN 101, 102) and FREN 103.
FREN102,Elementary French II, (4 Credits)| Beginning French with emphasis on listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Laboratory work. Cannot receive credit for both (FREN 101, 102) and FREN 103.
FREN103,Accelerated Elementary French, (4 Credits)| Intensive study of beginning French with emphasis on listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Laboratory work. Required of students with two years of high school French.
FREN201,Intermediate French, (4 Credits)| Intermediate French with emphasis on reading, writing, and conversation in the context of French-speaking culture. Prerequisite to any further study in French. Prerequisite: FREN 102, 103 (or equivalent)
FREN209,Intermediate French In France, (4 Credits)| Conversation, composition, and grammar review, with on-site experience of history and culture of France. Offered in France only. (Subject to department approval.)
FREN331,French Conversation, (4 Credits)| Intensive practice in oral and written communication with emphasis on listening comprehension and natural spoken expression based on videos, and readings of authentic materials. Lab fee.
FREN333,Global French: Introduction to the Francophone World, (4 Credits)| Introduction to the Francophone world through exposure to a diversity of cultural artifacts (literature, newspaper articles, written and oral interviews, films, songs) from various French-speaking countries. This course includes a systematic review of French grammar with a special emphasis on written expression.
FREN334,Culture And Communication, (2 Credits)| Study of French history, art, architecture, film, geography, social and economic structures; acquisition of skills useful in business. Different emphasis each year; may be repeated for credit. Legacy diversity designation.
FREN335,Francophone Civilization and Culture, (2 to 4 Credits)| On-site study of Francophone history, architecture, art, politics, and society. Offered in Francophone countries only.
FREN338,Advanced French in Francophone Country, (2 to 4 Credits)| Advanced grammar, conversation, and composition, taught by native speakers in a Francophone university setting. Course content and level variable. Offered in Francophone countries only.
FREN347,Francophone Literature, (4 Credits)| Overview of Francophone writers from the 20th and 21st centuries with selected readings from various literary works. Offered odd years in the fall.
FREN348,Adolescence & Early Adulthood in Modern French Literature, (4 Credits)| Exploration of representations of adolescence and early adulthood in French literature from the Renaissance to the present. Various genres: essays, plays, poetry, novels.
FREN371,Methods of Teaching Foreign Languages, (4 Credits)| The study of various methodologies, theories, and techniques of foreign language teaching; introduction to linguistics for second-language acquisition. Practice in a variety of micro-teaching situations. Required for secondary education licensure; otherwise, an elective toward major or minor.
FREN431,Advanced Conversation, (2 Credits)| High level development of oral communication with emphasis on vocabulary acquisition and expression approaching native speech. Offered alternate years.
FREN432,Advanced Grammar and Stylistics, (2 Credits)| General grammar review and advanced study of lesser-taught structures and nuances of meaning in order to improve critical awareness of stylistics and vocabulary and to develop authenticity of expression. Offered alternate years.
FREN439,Topics in French Language and Literature, (2 or 4 Credits)| Varied subjects including genre and movement studies, culture, and advanced language. May be repeated for credit. Legacy diversity designation.
FREN489,Topics in France, (2 Credits)| Varied subjects including literary and cultural studies. Offered in France only.
FREN494,Senior Seminar, (4 Credits)| This course is designed to be a culminating experience in which students demonstrate skills and knowledge acquired over their course of study as a French major at a liberal arts institution. Prerequisites: FREN 331, 333, study abroad, FREN 347 or FREN 347. Lab fee required.
FREN495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Reading and individual study of some aspect of French culture, literature, or language. Department approval required.
FREN496,Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| Department approval required. Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with French major.
GEND494,Gender Studies Capstone, (2 Credits)| This course pulls together students’ exploration of gender through the perspectives of theology, the social sciences, and humanities. The Gender Studies Capstone course promotes the mission statement of the Sociology/Anthropology department: to develop a biblical foundation for understanding social interaction both within American society and across cultures. Prerequisites: SOC 347 and BITH 383. Legacy diversity designation.
GEND495,Gender Studies Independent Study, (2 Credits)| Guided reading and research for the advanced major or research internship in ongoing institutional or faculty research.
GEOG211,General Geography, (2 Credits)| This course will examine the interrelationships between people and their geographic environments; physical, social, economic, political, demographic, and cultural. Students will be expected to learn basic place names and to understand geographic relationships, concepts, and terms. Required of all students seeking teacher licensure in the social sciences. Does not count as a history course for students pursuing the regular history major.
GEOL201,Exploring the Dynamic Earth - Field, (4 Credits)| Introduction to geoscience in the field, focus on geological history of the SD Black Hills through on-site study of rocks, minerals, fossils, and earth processes as seen in rock strata, folds, faults, mountains, mines and other human impacts on the environment. Emphasis on field excursions and data collection procedures (topographic and geologic maps, sample collection, and feature interpretations). Indoor lab work supports the fieldwork. Field trip ($50 field trip fee). Offered only at the Science Station. Su.
GEOL211,Exploring the Dynamic Earth, (4 Credits)| Introduction to the physical properties and processes of the Earth with special emphases on the current practice of geology and its significant contributions to humans and the environment. Topics are presented in the plate tectonic framework to include minerals and rocks, igneous activity, earthquakes, rivers, ground water, glaciers, and energy and mineral resources. Field trip fee.
GEOL212,Introduction to Environmental Studies, (4 Credits)| See ENVR 221.
GEOL306,Earth Resources and Environment, (2 Credits)| The application of geologic principles and knowledge to the development of natural resources (minerals and rocks, fossil and renewable fuels, air, water, and soil) and to the problems created by human occupancy and exploitation of the physical environment (solid and hazardous waste disposal, air and water pollution, land use management). Three hours lecture.
GEOL307,Water: the Essential Natural Resource, (4 Credits)| An overview of our most important natural resource - water. Topics include occurrence, chemistry, physiological requirement for water, effects upon past and present civilizations, surface and groundwater flow, global water supply, water pollution, water exploration and extraction. Lab fee.
GEOL308,Energy & Climate Change, (4 Credits)| Human use of energy and its predicted impact upon climate change. Review of the past and present use of global fossil fuel consumption as a possible cause of climate change. Study of past climate change since the ice age, present climate, basic meteorology, and future predictions of climate change forced by energy use and the resulting impact upon civilization. Arguments for and against global warming are evaluated with analysis through the science of climate change. Concludes with consideration of alternate energy sources to mitigate any effects of climate change. Lab fee.
GEOL311,Geology of National Parks, (2 Credits)| Overview of geography, geology, and natural history of selected US National Parks. Examination of featured natural attractions, processes, and history, including stratigraphy, fossils, canyons, caves, glaciers, volcanoes, and mountains. Reflection on Christian environmental stewardship, philosophy and ethics of preserving wilderness areas and the role of National Parks in American culture. Three hours lecture. No prerequisite.
GEOL321,Earth History and Stratigraphy, (4 Credits)| Basic principles of interpreting Earth history: geologic time, stratigraphic analysis, reconstructing past environments. Actualism, catastrophism and engagement with Christian theology in the historical development of geology. Overview of Earth history including origin of Earth-Moon, history of life, stratigraphic record and tectonic activity. Field trip fee and lab fee.
GEOL332,Studies In Regional Geology, (1 or 2 Credits)| Geologic study in the field of a selected region during an excursion over spring vacation or in May following commencement. Learning emphasis is on structural and stratigraphic framework, interpretation of geologic history, and natural resources of the region. Assignments include background readings, participation in discussions in the field, and preparation of field notes. (Field trip fee varies by destination.) Prerequisite: GEOL 201, 211, or consent of instructor. (1 or 2, repeatable for a max. of 4)
GEOL336,Process Geomorphology, (4 Credits)| The study of earth surface processes and the landforms they produce in the context of engineering and environmental applications. Topics include processes and landforms associated with: weathering, mass wasting, rivers, karst, neotectonics, glaciers, shorelines, and wind. Individual project and laboratory assignments required, including qualitative descriptions and quantitative measurements from topographic and geologic maps, and aerial photographs. Three hours lecture, three hours lab. Field trip fee and lab fee. Prerequisite: GEOL 201, 211, or consent of instructor. Alternate years.
GEOL341,Quantitative Methods for Environmental Analysis and Problem Solving, (4 Credits)| See ENVR 341.
GEOL342,Fundamentals of Geochemistry, (2 Credits)| Principles and applications of Earth’s chemical systems. Topics include low (aqueous) and higher temperature phenomena, crystal chemistry, trace-element distribution, isotopic and applied geochemical methods. Three hours lecture and three hours lab per week. Prerequisites: one introductory geology class (such as GEOL 201 or 211) and one semester of a chemistry lab class is recommended.
GEOL343,Fundamentals of Mineral Science, (2 Credits)| A brief survey of theory and applications in mineralogy. Emphasis is on chemical classification, modes of occurrence, modern techniques of mineral identification, and utility. Three hours lecture and three hours lab per week. Prerequisites: GEOL 201, or 211. Alternate years.
GEOL344,Genera, (4 Credits)| The study of igneous, and metamorphic rocks. Lecture sessions present petrogenesis and classification through topics such as lithification/diagenesis, magmatic phenomena, the role of temperature, pressure, and fluids, and plate tectonic settings. Laboratory projects include the identification of rock types and their variation, the significance of rock fabrics as observed in hand specimen and thin section, and the study of petrographic suites from classic localities. Three hours lecture, three hours lab. Field trip fee and lab fee. Prerequisite: GEOL 201, or 211. Suggested: GEOL 343. Alternate years.
GEOL355,Introduction to Soil Science, (2 Credits)| Basic survey including the origin and properties of soils, their classification and applications to agriculture, third world development, engineering, environmental issues. Laboratory and field experiences will provide opportunities to observe soil profiles and measure physical properties. Three hours lecture and two hours lab. Field trip fee and lab fee. Alternate years.
GEOL365,Physics of the Earth, (2 Credits)| Principles and applications of geophysics related to the study of the Earth's deep interior and geophysical prospecting. Topics include earthquake seismology, Earth's gravity, shape, magnetism, paleomagnetism, heat flow, temperature, and geodynamics. Also applied methods of seismic reflection and refraction, gravimetry, magnetism, electromagnetism, and resistivity. Three hours lecture plus two hours lab. Prerequisite: one four-hour physics laboratory course or permission of instructor. Alternate years. Lab fee.
GEOL371,Introduction to Geographic Information Systems, (2 Credits)| The hardware and software technology of GIS programs. Basic concepts of spatial data collection, storage, processing, and interpretation, combined with remote sensing. Uses the popular GIS software ArcGIS. Three hours lecture, two hours lab. Lab fee.
GEOL372,GIS Practicum, (2 Credits)| Application of GIS methods to student-designed projects. Hardware and software expertise derived from GEOL 371 (prerequisite). Two hours directed research, one hour discussion per week.
GEOL375,Biogeology, (4 Credits)| Survey of paleontology and the history of life as interpreted from the fossil record. Topics include description and classification of fossil groups, functional morphology, evolution, biostratigraphy, and paleoecology. Field trips to study ancient life in the field and exhibits at the Field Museum, Chicago. Three hours lecture, three hours lab. Field trip ($35 field trip fee). Prerequisite: GEOL 201, 211, or 212, or BIOL 201 or 242.
GEOL385,Topics in Earth Science, (2 or 4 Credits)| Selected topics from the following: economic geology, appropriate technologies, tectonics, and regional studies. Lectures or lecture/laboratory. Prerequisite: GEOL 201, or 211.
GEOL388,Appropriate Technology Development and the Environment, (2 Credits)| Seminar course exploring the relationship of science with sustainable development practices, both domestic and in an international context. Course foundations are theological and philosophical with regard to cost/benefit analyses and project planning. Study/discussion topics are partly student chosen and may include water resources, agriculture, energy systems, mineral-resource extraction, coastal development, housing, waste and sanitation, and sustainable land-use practices. Lecture and discussion. No prerequisite. Does not fulfill a general education requirement.
GEOL391,Environmental Modeling, (4 Credits)| See ENVR 391.
GEOL412,Field Geology, (6 Credits)| The comprehensive exercise of geological field techniques and interpretation in the context of western South Dakota and the Rockies. Projects involve the preparation of maps and reports from diverse areas and of varying complexity. Offered only at the Science Station. Field trip fee and lab fee. Prerequisite: GEOL 443 or consent of instructor. Corequisite: must be taken with GEOL 413. Alternate years. Su
GEOL413,Rocky Mountain Geology, (2 Credits)| Field geological study in the northern Rocky Mountains of South Dakota, Montana, and Wyoming. Observation of rock, strata, and structures in classic localities, including Black Hills, Devil’s Tower, Big Horn and Bear Tooth Mountains, and Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks. Field trip fee. Corequisite: must be taken with GEOL 412. Alternate years. Su
GEOL437,Hydrogeology, (4 Credits)| Basic processes and measurement of the hydrologic cycle, including: precipitation, evaporation, surface runoff, stream flow, soil moisture, and groundwater. Emphasis placed on groundwater, including: geology of occurrence, principles of flow, conceptual models of regional flow, chemistry and quality, well hydraulics, aquifer characteristics, resource development, detection of pollutants, and contaminant transport. Three hours lecture, three hours lab. Field trip fee and lab fee. Prerequisite: GEOL 201, 211, or consent of instructor. Alternate years.
GEOL443,Structural Geology, (4 Credits)| Architecture of the dynamic earth. Earth movement and deformation in the context of plate tectonics. Laboratory simulation of stress and strain, study of deformed rocks, and interpretation of geologic maps; measurements and computations. Three hours lecture, three hours lab. Field trip fee and lab fee. Pre/Corequisite: GEOL 201 or 211. Alternate years.
GEOL494,Senior Capstone Seminar for Geology Majors, (2 Credits)| Integration seminar for seniors or for juniors who have completed most geology requirements. Reading and discussion of history and philosophy of geological science and critical reflection of student's experience in Christian liberal arts education, understanding of vocation and ethical considerations of practice. Prerequisite: Completion of 16 credit hrs of GEOL courses.
GEOL495,Problems In Geology, (1 to 4 Credits)| Independent study or research. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department chairman.
GEOL496,Internship, (1 to 4 Credits)| Supervised off-campus experience with departmental approval. Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with Geology or Environmental Studies major. (credit variable)
GERM101,Elementary German I, (4 Credits)| Beginning German with emphasis on understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. Laboratory practice. Cannot receive credit for both (GERM 101, 102) and GERM 103.
GERM102,Elementary German II, (4 Credits)| Beginning German with emphasis on understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. Laboratory practice. Cannot receive credit for both (GERM 101, 102) and GERM 103.
GERM103,Accelerated Elementary German, (4 Credits)| Intensive study of beginning German with emphasis on understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. Laboratory work. Required of students with two years of high school German.
GERM201,Intermediate German, (4 Credits)| Conversation, composition, and grammar review based on readings and videos; exploration of various aspects of culture of German-speaking communities. Online drill work. Prerequisite to any further study in German. Prerequisite: GERM 102, 103 (or equivalent)
GERM209,Intermediate German in Germany, (4 Credits)| Conversation, composition, and grammar review, with on-site experience of history and culture of Germany. Offered in Germany only.
GERM338,Advanced German in Germany, (4 Credits)| Development of oral proficiency. Discussion and interpretation of shorter literary texts, and social and political topics. Offered in Germany only.
GERM341,Contemporary German Culture and Mores, (4 Credits)| Introduction to institutions of contemporary German culture and society, including geography, gender relationships and the family, the church, the educational system, politics and government, minority populations, labor and economics, popular culture and media. Overview and analysis of behavioral norms and mores in the Federal Republic, coupled with comparative reference to the United States and broader German-speaking Europe. Intensive practice in oral and written communication with emphasis on listening comprehension and natural spoken expression based on audio recordings, video materials, and readings of authentic texts. Lab fee required.
GERM342,Contemporary German Culture: Politics Economics and Current Events, (4 Credits)| An exploration of contemporary German culture as mediated through German newspapers, magazines, and various online sources. Special focus on current events with an emphasis on political and economic issues in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. Continued review of grammar started in GERM 341. Conducted in German.
GERM343,German Cultural Identity from Charlemagne to the Berlin Republic, (4 Credits)| A survey of cultural periods and developments in German-speaking Europe from early beginnings in the Holy Roman Empire to the present day Berlin Republic with special focus on the question of German national identity. The course will investigate a variety of cultural artifacts including short prose texts, poetry, dramatic performances, film clips, select artworks, and architectural examples. Emphasis on cultural literacy and communicative expression. Taught on-site in Munich, Berlin, and environs yearly during May-June Wheaton in Germany program. Conducted entirely in German. Prerequisites: either GERM 341 or 342 (and instructor approval).
GERM351,Topics in German Literature, (4 Credits)| Topics in German literature including genre, movement, and author studies. Taught primarily in German. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: a 300-level course in German or instructor permission.
GERM361,Topics in German Language and Cultural Studies, (4 Credits)| Focus on issues in German cinema, history, philosophy, society and theology, or on German language for special purposes, such as German for business and economics. Discussion, writing and presentation assignments, and major readings and film screenings in German. Prerequisite: GERM 341, 342, 343, or instructor approval. May be repeated for credit.
GERM363,Topics in German Language and Cultural Studies, (2 Credits)| Focus on issues in German cinema, history, philosophy, society and theology, or on German language for special purposes, such as German for business and economics. Discussion, writing and presentation assignments, and major readings and film screenings in German. Prerequisite: GERM 341, 342, 343, or instructor approval. May be repeated for credit.
GERM371,Methods of Teaching Foreign Languages, (4 Credits)| The study of various methodologies, theories, and techniques of foreign language teaching; introduction to linguistics for second-language acquisition. Practice in a variety of micro-teaching situations. Required for secondary education licensure; otherwise, an elective toward major or minor.
GERM372,German for Reading, (4 Credits)| Intensive introduction to German grammar for the special purpose of reading/translating academic prose (scholarly books and journal articles), with a particular focus on readings in theological disciplines and the humanities. Acquisition of a broad recognition vocabulary and development of basic reading comprehension abilities. Recommended for undergraduates anticipating graduate study in humanities and theological studies. Does not count toward Foreign Language Requirement. Not open to German majors/minors without special permission. Cross-listed with BITH 505.
GERM373,German for Reading II: Translation Workshop, (0 Credits)| Building on GERM 372/BITH 505, this course meets weekly during the subsequent semester for an intensive workshop in reading/translating academic prose (primary sources; scholarly books and articles), with a particular focus on readings in theological disciplines and the humanities. Emphasis on textual analysis, review and expansion of key structures, management of linguistic challenges, and development of global reading skills. Prerequisite: GERM 372, BITH 505 or the equivalent. Cross listed with BITH 506.
GERM431,Other Germans: Turkish and Minority Experience, (4 Credits)| Introduction to minority and multicultural identity and cultural hybridity in contemporary Germany, Austria and Switzerland, with focus on marginal societal groups, including evangelical Christians, quasi-religious sects, and Turkish and other immigrant populations. Analysis of immigrant literary and cinematic works and overview of social challenges in immigration and asylum policy, with particular focus on guest workers, integration of Turkish immigrants, and Christian-Muslim relations. Prerequisites: GERM 341 or 342 or permission of instructor. Meets legacy diversity designation.
GERM432,The Holocaust and Contemporary Jewish Experience, (4 Credits)| Written and oral analysis of depictions of the Holocaust in various national literary and cinematic media and of contemporary Jewish authors in the German-speaking countries; exploration of issues facing contemporary Jews in German-speaking Europe. Includes medium-length research paper. Conducted in German with some discussion in English. Meets legacy diversity designation
GERM437,Topics in German Language and Literature, (2 or 4 Credits)| Varied subjects, including genre and movement studies, film, culture, and advanced language. May be repeated for credit.
GERM489,Special Topics, (2 to 4 Credits)| Advanced study in language, literature, and civilization in Germany. Offered in Germany only.
GERM491,Practicum, (0 to 2 Credits)| Offered in Germany only. Graded pass/fail.
GERM492,Faith & Literature & Film, (2 Credits)| (Section 1) 492-1 Agents of Change: Faith and the Social Order in German Literature and Film. Intensive seminar on interactions between society and varieties of belief in Germany, Austria and Switzerland. Literary readings and analysis of cinematic works, supplemented with critical theories and socio-historical sources in German and English. Open to students who have taken GERM 494-2 or by permission. Offered alternate years. Cross-listed with GERM 494-1. (Section 2) 492-2 Faith and its Role in German Literature from the Medieval Period to the Fall of the Third Reich. Intensive seminar with emphasis on the intersection of German literature with Christian theological perspectives from the High Middle Ages until the end of World War II. Open to students who have taken GERM 494-1 or by permission. Offered alternate years. Cross-listed with GERM 494-2.
GERM494,Senior Seminar, (4 Credits)| (Section 1) 494-1. Agents of Change: Faith and the Social Order in German Literature and Film. Intensive seminar on interactions between society and varieties of belief in Germany, Austria and Switzerland. Literary readings and analysis of cinematic works, supplemented with critical theories and socio-historical sources in German and English. Students will produce a major research paper that integrates Christian faith with the subject matter. Offered alternate years. Meets Senior Capstone Requirement. Lab fee required.; (Section 2) 494-2. Faith and its Role in German Literature from the Medieval Period to the Fall of the Third Reich. Intensive seminar with emphasis on the intersection of German literature with Christian theological perspectives from the High Middle Ages until the end of World War II. Students will produce a major paper that integrates faith with the subject matter. Offered alternate years. Meets Core Capstone Requirement. Prerequisites: GERM 341, 342, 343 (or other study abroad experience) or special permission of instructor. Lab fee required.
GERM495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Reading and individual study of some aspect of German culture, literature, or language. Department approval required.
GERM496,Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| Department approval required. Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with German major.
GEL211,Vocation Practicum, (2 to 4 Credits)| Students who wish to receive academic credit for an internship or practicum experience not offered through the major or minor department may receive such credit through GEL 211. This course requires prior approval of the Practicum Instructor in the Center for Global and Experiential Learning and participation in a seminar alongside or after the practicum experience. Students may register for the practicum and keep the course in-progress while taking the seminar the semester after the experience (this also allows students to reach the required clock-hours for the practicum within two semesters if needed). Students must complete 40 hours of work experience for each credit earned and must attend the seminar course which meets 7 times during the semester. The course focuses on Christian understandings of vocation and calling, fosters self-reflection on the work experience, and facilitates assessment of work-related skills. The credit earned will count as elective credit towards graduation; it will not count toward a major, minor, or certificate unless it is approved in advance by the appropriate academic department. No more than 12 practicum or internship credits in total may be counted towards graduation requirements. Students must have completed at least two semesters on-campus or at another college or university to enroll.
GEL231,Orientation to Study Abroad, (2 Credits)| This course serves as the orientation seminar for students who plan to study abroad or in other cross-cultural contexts. Students are encouraged to take this course in the B quad before the semester abroad. When taken in combination with GEL 232 Re-Entry Seminar, after the semester abroad or off-campus cross-cultural study experience, this course meets the Global Perspectives thematic core.
GEL232,Study Abroad Re-Entry Seminar, (2 Credits)| Designed for students who have returned from study abroad or other off-campus study in cross-cultural contexts. Students are encouraged to enroll in the course in the A Quad after return to campus. Building on work complete in GEL 231 Orientation to Study Abroad, and the off-campus experience, it provides the opportunity to identify, pursue, and explore new or unanswered cultural and theological questions and to revisit and refine previous work. The course also facilitates the re-entry process and provides a forum for direct contribution to the globalization of the campus community. When this course is completed in combination with GEL 231, it fulfills the Global Perspectives thematic core. Prerequisite GEL 231.
GEL301,Survey of Mexican Art, (2 Credits)| This critical survey of Mexican art explores a variety of art forms, genres, and representative pieces while introducing students to elements of creativity as well as cultivating skills and visual sensitivities to enhance active engagement with works of art. In addition to readings, students interact directly with works from diverse periods of human history, from Pre-Columbian times to the present, in the city of Querétaro and during academic excursions in other parts of the country. Students also create artwork during the course and articulate thoughtful Christian reflections on specific works. Concurrent studies of Mexican society, cultures, language and history help students interpret works in context. The course is taught in Spanish during the WIM program and includes academic excursions that allow students engage works of art in context. Prerequisite: SPAN 201 or equivalent. Corequisite: enrollment in Wheaton in Mexico.
GEL302,Exploring Mexican History, (4 Credits)| This required course explores the complexities of Mexican history from Pre-Columbian times to the present. Students critically analyze primary and secondary sources in both Spanish and English to interpret past events using sound historical reasoning. Students learn to discern and articulate connections between Christian faith and practice and the investigation of historical events. The course is taught in Spanish during the Wheaton in Mexico program and includes academic excursions that allow students to engage significant places and reflect on contemporary interpretations of historical events. Prerequisite: SPAN 201. Corequisite: enrollment in Wheaton in Mexico.
GEL321,Engaging Mexican Cultures, (4 Credits)| This seminar is required during Wheaton in Mexico's semester abroad. It builds on themes covered in GEL 231 Orientation to Study Abroad (section for WIM) allowing participants to further develop and apply the knowledge, concepts and skills of intercultural competency. In particular, students employ the concept of culture and engage in participant observation and ethnographic interviewing to explore multiple dimensions of Mexican culture. It serves to integrate the materials learned in other classes taken during the semester and to facilitate the process of cultural adaptation. Prerequisite: GEL 231 (section for Wheaton in Mexico). Corequisite: enrollment in Wheaton in Mexico.
GREK101,Elementary Greek I, (4 Credits)| Intensive study of elementary grammar, syntax, and vocabulary; selected readings from Ancient Greek authors including those of the New Testament.
GREK102,Elementary Greek II, (4 Credits)| Intensive study of elementary grammar, syntax, and vocabulary; selected readings from Ancient Greek authors including those of the New Testament. Prerequisite: GREK 101.
GREK201,Intermediate Greek, (4 Credits)| Review of grammar and syntax accompanied by selections from various Greek authors including those of the New Testament. Prerequisite to further work in Greek. Prerequisite: GREK 102 (or equivalent)
GREK331,Athenian Tragedy, (4 Credits)| Reading a tragedy by Sophocles or Euripides: Oedipus Tyrannus, Antigone, Medea, Bacchae, or other; introduction to literary and historical conventions of Athenian dram; style and dialect of choral poetry; meter; considerations of ethics, gender, myth, religion, and intertextuality. Prerequisite: GREK 201 or competency.
GREK332,Homer: Iliad, (4 Credits)| Intensive readings of selected books from the Iliad; introduction to Homeric dialect and meter and the Homeric question; issues of interpretation, especially warfare, ethics, glory, death, and the gods. Prerequisite: GREK 201 or competency.
GREK333,Homer's Odyssey, (4 Credits)| Intensive readings of selected books from the Odyssey, introduction to Homeric dialect and meter and the Homeric question; issues of interpretation, especially conceptions of the hero, humans, the gods, narrative, irony; final research paper on a topic of literary or historical interest. Prerequisite: GREK 201 or competency.
GREK334,Advanced Koine Reading, (2 or 4 Credits)| New Testament book studies in Greek or selections from the Septuagint or the early church fathers to illustrate the development of thought within Christianity.
GREK335,Plato: The Apology of Socrates, (4 Credits)| The life and times of Athens' most enduring citizen by reading his own defense and others' accounts of his final days. Prerequisite: GREK 201 or competency.
GREK336,Classical Rhetoric, (4 Credits)| Intensive readings of speeches selected from Athenian orators: Gorgias, Antiphon, Lysias, Demosthenes, or others; genres and conventions of oratory (deliberative, epideictic, forensic); readings from Aristotle's Rhetoric (in translation) and its application to ancient oratory; tropes and rhetorical analysis. Prerequisite: GREK 201 or competency.
GREK337,Greek Prose Composition, (2 Credits)| A systematic review of Greek morphology and syntax by writing sentences in Classical and Koine Greek.
GREK338,Herodotus' Histories, (4 Credits)| Intensive readings of selections from Herodotus' Histories - the first surviving work of history in the West; introduction to the Ionic dialect and Herodotus' style; overview of the Histories' major themes - happiness, fate, freedom, ethnicity, religion, and justice. Prequisite: GREK 201 or competency.
GREK339,Myth/Hesiod, (2 Credits)| Study of Greek mythology through reading selections of Hesiod; overview of epic dialect and meter; examination of genre and comparison to eastern Mediterranean analogs (e.g., Genesis)
GREK342,NT and Patristics, (4 Credits)| Selections from the Greek NT and patristic literature to illustrate the literary and intellectual background of the ancient world and early Christianity. Prerequisite: GREK 201 or competency.
GREK343,Septuagint, (4 Credits)| Selections from the Septuagint and intertestamental literature to illustrate the literary and intellectual background of the ancient world leading to Christianity. Prerequisite: GREK 201 or competency.
GREK451,Greek Exegesis, (2 or 4 Credits)| See BITH 451.
GREK487,Topics in Greek Language and Literature, (2 Credits)| Varied subjects. Designated studies in specialized genres, literature, culture, comparative studies, or inter-disciplinary studies.
GREK489,Topics in Greek Language and Literature, (4 Credits)| Varied subjects. Designated studies in specialized genres, literature, culture, comparative studies, or inter-disciplinary studies.
GREK494,Senior Capstone, (4 Credits)| Classical Language majors will take a capstone course in their senior year that connects ancient Classical languages with other areas of inquiry. The student will do focused research on the texts of the classical world, including but not limited to the Septuagint and the New Testament. Students will demonstrate how their chosen topic relates to Christian faith. Prerequisite: GREK 201
GREK495,Independent Reading, (1 to 4 Credits)| Department approval required.
HEBR301,Elementary Hebrew I, (4 Credits)| Basic grammar, syntax, and vocabulary with readings from the Old Testament and modern Hebrew authors.
HEBR302,Elementary Hebrew II, (4 Credits)| Basic grammar, syntax, and vocabulary with readings from the Old Testament and modern Hebrew authors. Prerequisite: HEBR 301
HEBR401,Intermediate Hebrew, (4 Credits)| Review of grammar and syntax with an introduction to the Masoretic text of the Old Testament, intensive reading from selected Old Testament texts and modern writers. Prerequisite: HEBR 302 (or equivalent)
HEBR487,Topics in Hebrew Lit & Culture, (2 Credits)| Topics in Hebrew Language and Literature. Varied subjects. Designated studies in specialized genres, literature, culture, comparative studies, or inter-disciplinary studies.
HEBR489,Topics in Hebrew Lit & Culture, (4 Credits)| Topics in Hebrew Language and Literature. Varied subjects. Designated studies in specialized genres, literature, culture, comparative studies, or inter-disciplinary studies.
HEBR495,Independent Reading/Rsrch, (1 to 4 Credits)| An independent study in Hebrew which may be either advanced grammar, reading of the literature, culture, comparative studies, or inter-disciplinary studies. Hebrew Old Testament, or an exegesis of a portion of the Hebrew text of the Old Testament. Department approval required.
HIST102,Exploring the Global Past, (4 Credits)| History 102 seminars encourage students to examine cross cultural interactions through a focus on a particular historical question, period, or event. Students choose from a diverse range of courses such as Medieval Faith: Jews, Christian and Muslims in the Middle Ages; The French and Haitian Revolutions; Middle Ground: Africans, Europeans, and Natives in the Atlantic World; Exploring the Korean War, etc. History 102 seminars emphasize the development of historical thinking and Christian perspectives in the study of the past. Meets legacy general education requirement. In certain sections of HIST 102, a nominal course fee may be applied.
HIST103,Exploring the American Past, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the discipline of history that equips students for life-long learning by helping them to understand why Christians value study of the past and by giving them the tools to investigate it. The course provides an in-depth exploration of a critical period, concept, source, or event in U.S. History, analyzed within an explicitly comparative or cross-cultural framework. Students will engage in robust study of cultural and geographic diversity from historical and theological frameworks and will be encouraged to reflect on their own cultural and historical contexts as well. Students will learn to appreciate historical knowledge, engage in historical reasoning, develop historical consciousness, and practice historical reflection. Meets legacy general education requirement. In certain sections of HIST 103, a nominal course fee may be applied.
HIST105,World History, (4 Credits)| A survey of world history in Christian perspective from c. 1500 to the present. This course provides the chronological, geographical, and cultural breadth that serves as a contextualizing vehicle for the liberal arts. Attention given to moral issues of history. Meets legacy general education requirement. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST111,World History Ancient to Modern, (4 Credits)| Single semester survey of world history from the ancient period to the present. Examines the political, religious, and social developments that forged the modern world. Meets legacy general education requirements. Specifically addresses licensure requirements for secondary education. Required for History/Social Science majors. Recommended for elementary education majors. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST115,World Civilization To 1600, (4 Credits)| A study of the ancient Middle Eastern, Mediterranean, and European roots of modern Western civilization through the Renaissance/Reformation era. Some attention given to contemporaneous developments in Asia. Emphasis is directed towards the identification of the intellectual foundations of the Western traditions in a comparative perspective. Meets legacy general education requirement.
HIST131,Topics In World History, (2 Credits)| Through a biographical approach, investigates selected themes in world history in light of liberal arts and Christian thought and values. Not open to students who have completed HIST 105, 111, or 115. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST201,Why History?, (4 Credits)| This course provides history majors with a robust study of historical thinking and its relationship to our different vocational callings as Christians. Students will examine a range of primary and secondary sources and develop analytical, research, and communication skills integral to the major and a Christian liberal arts education.
HIST231,History in Africa Before 1850, (4 Credits)| This course introduces the history of Africa from the innovation of early human communities across continent (from the Great Pyramids in Northeast Africa to the Khoi-San foragers of South Africa's Western Cape) until the beginnings of European colonization in the mid-nineteenth century. We will emphasize the diverse social, economic and political strategies that Africans innovated and developed to engage in ever-widening contexts that often stretched beyond the continent.
HIST232,History in Africa Since 1850, (4 Credits)| This course privileges the voices of African writers, artists, historians, musicians, and other local witnesses who described how they have overcome the challenges of living in modern Africa from human trafficking across the Atlantic and Indian Oceans (and the Sahara) through colonial conquest, genocide, and civil war. In particular the course will explore the political and economic institutions established during and after colonialism, new religious and cultural movements (including African interpretations of Christianity and Islam), the legacy of racism, and the politics of gender on the continent.
HIST251,American History to 1865, (4 Credits)| A general survey of the history of the United States from the colonial period through the American Civil War, with special emphasis on engagement of primary documents. Rejecting the view of history as an endless succession of discrete events, the course pays special attention to the predominant belief systems of Americans during two-and-a-half centuries, focusing in particular on the concepts of republicanism and democracy, as well as Americans' contested understandings of human nature, human rights, and human freedom.
HIST252,American History from 1865, (4 Credits)| A general survey of the history of the United States from the Civil War to the present, with special emphasis on using primary documents. Students will debate the merits of the different interpretations for historical events, evaluate the ways historians construct their stories, and discuss the significance of those stories. Major course themes include the United States' engagement with other countries, labor activism and class relations, politics, race, gender and religion.
HIST292,Latin American History, (4 Credits)| Latin American History. A survey of the history and cultural development of Central, South, and Caribbean America with emphasis on the era since 1500. Includes analysis of the impact of the European/indigenous encounter, of U.S./Latin American relations, and of the challenges of modernization. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST295,Introduction to Historical Inquiry, (2 Credits)| Introduction to principles and techniques of historical scholarship. Attention given to historical thinking, literacy, research, and communication skills. Useful for non-majors. Required of majors and minors.
HIST305,Introduction to the History of Christianity, (2 Credits)| A summary introduction to the history of Christianity designed to provide a rapid, but comprehensive overview to assist students who seek a basic understanding of the history of Christianity as background for other fields of study. Counts toward the history of Christianity requirement for the major. Not open to students who have completed BITH 577 in previous years.
HIST311,History of Philosophy: Ancient & Medieval, (4 Credits)| See PHIL 311.
HIST312,History of Philosophy: Modern & Contemporary, (4 Credits)| See PHIL 312.
HIST324,High School History/Social Science Methods, (2 Credits)| An introduction to methods of teaching high school history/social science students, including units on classroom management, lesson planning, assessment, individual differences, learning resources, educational technology, and teaching strategies appropriate to history/social science classrooms. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L and admission to the Wheaton Teacher Education Program (WheTEP).
HIST325,Middle Grade History/Social Science Methods, (2 Credits)| Provides an overview of the social sciences content and effective teaching methods for middle grade educators within a framework of informed inquiry. Based on the 2015 Illinois Social Studies Standards NCSS C3 Framework for Social Studies, and the Illinois Professional Teaching Standards. Prerequisite: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L and admission to the Wheaton Teacher Education Program (WheTEP).
HIST331,African History, (4 Credits)| Cultures and National Identity in African History. Focuses on the development of select African societies from their early institutional and cultural traditions to the present with emphasis on the themes of the impact of Islam, European colonial influences, national independence movements, and contemporary African society. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST334,Society and Politics in East Asian History, (4 Credits)| Cultural development and distinctives of China, Korea, and Japan, from their traditional roots through their classical periods to the modern period. Contemporary East Asian society and affairs are covered and various themes will be emphasized each semester. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST335,The Construction of Modern Japan 1800-1960, (4 Credits)| The 1868 Meiji Restoration occupies a central place in Japanese history with many marking it as the turning point for the rise of modern Japan. Citing shifts such as one from a feudal system with shoguns and samurai to an imperial Japan, scholars narrate Meiji Japan as being filled with radical breaks from the past. The questions arise, what were some of these significant changes that seemed to be breaks from the past and that constituted the modern in Japan? To what degree was the Restoration a break from the Tokugawa period and to what degree was it a continuation of economic and social trends of late-Tokugawa Japan? Did the changes and continuities embodied in Meiji Japan play into the development of Japan's imperial era and road to World War II? This course explores these questions through a study of Japan from 1800 to 1960.
HIST341,Ancient History: The Rise and Fall of Empires, (4 Credits)| Examines the political, economic, social, and cultural development of the Near East and Mediterranean from the first civilizations in the third millennium B.C. to the collapse of the Roman Empire in the fifth century A.D. The course covers the First Age of Empires in the Ancient Near East as well as the Greek and Roman worlds.
HIST342,Statecraft and International Relations in the Ancient Near East, (4 Credits)| See ARCH 365.
HIST345,Medieval Europe to 1300, (4 Credits)| Analyzes the political, social, economic, and religious foundations of Europe from the Early to the High Middle Ages. Topics include: the collapse of the Roman Empire, Barbarian invasions, rise of Islam, Byzantine Empire, kingship and authority, and the development of Christianity.
HIST346,Renaissance Europe (1300-1600), (4 Credits)| Examines the political, social, and religious developments that created modern Europe. Topics include the emergence of international power politics, the rise of humanism, Renaissance art, and cross-cultural encounters between Europeans and peoples of Africa, Asia, and the Americas.
HIST347,Men Women and Society in Early Modern Europe, (4 Credits)| Examines the cultural, political, social, and religious developments that shaped men’s and women’s lives from 1300 to 1650. Topics include: family life, courtship and marriage, the emergence of the Renaissance state and its intervention in family life, and the impact of religious change on men and women. Particular attention is given to how this period shaped modern theological and cultural assumptions about men, women, and family structure.
HIST348,Revolutionary Europe (1789-1870), (4 Credits)| Focuses on enlightened absolutism, the revolutions of 1789 and 1848, the social consequences of industrialization, and mid-nineteenth century foreign relations. Emphasis on France and Germany.
HIST349,Origins of Contemporary Europe (1870-1950), (4 Credits)| Analysis of socioeconomic, political, and cultural foundations of twentieth-century Europe, and the causes and impact of both world wars.
HIST353,American Cities & Suburbs, (4 Credits)| This course explores the history of American cities and suburbs, paying attention to questions like: What is the story of racial, religious, ethnic and class dynamics in cities and suburbs? What is the story of unity, disunity, exclusion and inclusion? What has community looked like over time in suburban and urban history? How has community changed?
HIST355,History of Women in the U,S, (4 Credits)| Analysis of the social, cultural, and political aspects of women's history from the colonial period to the present, with particular emphasis on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and on women's religious experiences and contributions. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST356,The American Revolution, (4 Credits)| An exploration of the founding of the United States as a nation that analyzes the causes, course, and consequences of the revolt against British colonial rule between 1763 and 1788. The course asks how both elite and common Americans participated in the Revolution, what the Revolution meant to them, and how the Revolution affected their lives. It accords particular attention to the role of Christians in the conflict, and concludes by contemplating the legacy of the Revolution to the contemporary United States.
HIST357,The American Civil War, (4 Credits)| This course explores the causes, course, and consequences of the American Civil War, a bloody ordeal by fire in which Americans fought Americans to determine the nature of the Union, the definition of democracy, and the meaning of freedom. Course readings and assignments focus on the experiences and values of common Americans - Northern and Southern, male and female, free and enslaved - with particular emphasis on the war's larger meaning to posterity.
HIST361,The Global Cold War, (4 Credits)| An analysis of the dramatic political and social changes emerging in the Cold War period which have shaped the whole world since 1945. The focus is on such issues as the rise of the nuclear age, postwar human rights, the arms race and détente, space race, Middle East crises, technological impacts, decolonization and the emergence of the developing world, and the fall of European communism. Also included is the role of prominent Christians and the Church during the post-World War II era. Satisfies the world history requirement for the history major. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST362,Topics in Traditional Asian History, (2 or 4 Credits)| Course material centers on the cultural development of traditional society in the locations visited each year during the May-in-Asia program. Course will vary each year based on sites visited. Legacy diversity designation. Su
HIST363,Topics in Continuity and Change in Modern Asia, (2 or 4 Credits)| An analysis of continuity and change in Asian society in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries specifically related to the locations visited each year during the May-in-Asia program. Course will vary each year based on sites visited. Legacy diversity designation. Su
HIST364,East Africa and the Indian Ocean Region, (4 Credits)| This course analyzes the development and interaction of the many cultures which compose the Indian Ocean region. The fascinating site for our study is the multi-cultural East African island of Zanzibar which has been instrumental over many centuries in the history of the region and where there is a combination of African, Arab, Persian, Indian, Chinese, and European cultures. This course will study such themes as the origins of Swahili civilization, the Indian Ocean trading system, impact of Arab and Islamic civilization, European colonialism, the slave and ivory trade, African independence movements, Christian influences, and political and economic conditions in contemporary Africa by a mixture of course lectures, outside lectures, cultural and historical tours as well as readings from both primary and secondary sources. Offered summers. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST365,Modern Middle East, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the history of the Modern Middle East with emphasis on the region during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. This course provides a survey of the cultural and political development of the Middle East with special attention to the fate of the Ottoman Empire and the resulting imperial European presence and twentieth-century Middle Eastern struggle for independence and a transition to authentic modernity.
HIST371,The Enlightenment, (4 Credits)| Explores the European Enlightenment as an intellectual, cultural, and artistic movement. The course analyzes the social, political, economic and religious contexts of the Enlightenment and charts the development of new ideas and approaches to knowledge during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Through a close reading of key Enlightenment texts, the course considers not only the complexities of Europe's first self-consciously modern age, but also the broader question of what it means to be modern.
HIST374,Nazi Germany, (4 Credits)| Analyzes the origins and nature of the Nazi ideology and party, as well as the cultural, social and political patterns of the Third Reich of the 1930s. Particular emphasis is given to the Nazi murders during World War II, interpretive issues, and the visual culture of the whole Nazi era.
HIST377,British History to 1688, (4 Credits)| Analyzes the history of England from the Anglo-Saxon Settlement to the Glorious Revolution. Topics include the development of a unified monarchy, the Norman Conquest, the emergence of representative government, the Reformation, and the English Civil War. Alternate years.
HIST378,History of Britain Since 1832, (4 Credits)| An analysis of the rise of industrial, urban class society, an examination of higher and popular culture, emphasis on the Victorian era and the early twentieth century. Alternate years.
HIST382,U,S, Foreign Policy, (4 Credits)| See IR 378.
HIST391,Topics in History, (2 or 4 Credits)| Selected areas of historical study as announced.
HIST451,Topics in American History, (2 or 4 Credits)| Advanced courses in the history of the United States as announced, including ethnic, intellectual, and constitutional history.
HIST455,American Urban History, (4 Credits)| Examines how urbanization has shaped and directed much of America's social, cultural, political, and economic development from colonial times to the present. Lecture, discussion, readings from primary sources.
HIST461,Origins and Consequences of the Pacific War, (4 Credits)| Investigates the origins of the Pacific War using both translated primary documents and secondary scholarly literature. Special attention is paid to the changing international environment and especially the role of the United States, alongside Japanese domestic social, economic, political, military, and intellectual developments. Recommended to upper-level students interested in understanding Japan, twentieth-century East Asian relations, international relations, war, ideology and conflict. Satisfies the world history requirement for the major. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST463,Enlightenment Modernity and Its Discontents, (4 Credits)| Reviews the social, political, economic, and intellectual aspects of the European Enlightenment, explores the process of diffusion of these influences, and then considers the various responses to this phenomena beginning in Europe but extending to various parts of the world. Responses covered may include Muslim, Jewish, Christian, conservative, Marxist, Confucian, postcolonial, and postmodern. Legacy diversity designation.
HIST483,History of Christianity in North America, (4 Credits)| An overview of events, ideas, people, and groups that have helped to shape Christianity in North America from the colonial era to the present (with primary emphasis on Christianity in the U.S.). Meets the history of Christianity requirement for the major.
HIST489,Colloquium in the History of American Christianity, (2 or 4 Credits)| See BITH 682.
HIST491,Research Seminar, (2 to 4 Credits)| Advanced research in history on varied topics. The course may be taken for credit a second time with a different instructor or topic. Especially designed for students considering graduate school.
HIST494,Senior Capstone, (2 or 4 Credits)| A capstone experience for History majors that debates the implications of Christianity for the meaning and practice of history, and explores the value of faith-informed historical practice to life-long Christian faithfulness. Prerequisites: History major and senior standing or departmental approval.
HIST495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Individualized program of reading, research, writing, and oral examination, which allows for extensive study in a specific area of interest. Not to be used as a substitute for courses or seminars already covered in the curriculum. Prerequisites: junior or senior standing and approval of department faculty and chair. Intended for majors only. See the online Handbook at the department web page for further information.
HIST496,Internship, (4 Credits)| Prerequisites: junior or senior standing, minimum of 16 credits in History major completed, and approval of department chair. Graded pass/fail. See the online Handbook at the department web page for further information.
HIST498,Honors Tutorial, (4 Credits)| Reading and research in selected areas. Prerequisites: Admission to Department Honors program, senior standing. See the online Handbook at the department web page for further information.
HIST499,Honors Thesis, (4 Credits)| Preparation of senior honors thesis. Not applicable to major requirements.
HDI514,Founations of Disaster & Humanitarian Assistance, (4 Credits)| An introduction to evidence-based and informed psychosocial care skills, programs, and interventions in context to disasters, crisis, and other trauma-inducing events.
HDI524,Preparedness Planning Mitigation & Continuity Management, (4 Credits)| The course focuses on understanding evidence-based leadership best practices, procedures, and policies for disaster operations that strengthens disaster resilience in affected communities.
HDI534,NGO Leadership, (2 Credits)| This course seeks to develop effective humanitarian and disaster non-profit leaders. This course will review the history, theoretical underpinnings, and practice of social entrepreneurship and program and project planning in non-profit and official development organizations. It also covers the corresponding grant-writing, fundraising, business planning and marketing methods, and tools, strategies and techniques used in these activities. Heavy emphasis is placed on a hands-on learning approach, while stressing the importance of understanding and critiquing the conceptual frameworks on which these practices rely from a Biblical perspective.
HDI544,Organizing Emergency Humanitarian Assistance, (2 Credits)| Leadership principles for effective emergency management and humanitarian response will be taught for responding to a wide range of potential humanitarian crises, with an emphasis on evidence-based practices.
HDI614,Transformational Development, (4 Credits)| This course prepares leaders to actively engage government and public leaders through policy interventions and advocacy to advance the global struggle for human rights. Students are prepared to advocate for biblical justice by developing the skills necessary to assess and intervene in the policy process as well as to develop and implement advocacy campaigns.
HDI624,Refugee and Forced Migration Issues, (2 Credits)| An introduction to various historical and contemporary cases of forced displacement, integrating diverse disciplinary approaches, including legal, political and moral analysis.
HDI634,Field Work or Special Project, (4 Credits)| Students will participate in an approved supervised field practicum placement with a humanitarian or disaster-related organization; students with advance standing gained from significant prior field experience may opt to complete an applied professional or research project.
HDI644,Global Public Health, (2 Credits)| An introduction to public health in context to contemporary definition, determinants, development and direction as a field into a broad global context.
HDI654,Disaster Crisis & Trauma Intervention, (4 Credits)| An introduction to evidence-based and informed psychosocial care skills, programs, and interventions in context to disasters, crisis, and other trauma-inducing events.
HDI692,Comprehensive Exam, (0 Credits)| Prerequisite: submission of Candidacy form. Fee $75. Graded pass/fail.
HDI694,Field Operations, (4 Credits)| An intensive residence course that will involve a multi-day domestic and international field -simulations and practice in leadership and evaluation duties that will be supplemented with classroom learning experiences.
HDI695,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Department approval required.
HNGR114,Poverty Justice and Transformation, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the social, political, economic, biophysical, environmental and spiritual dimensions and causes of poverty, inequality and injustice. Examines the experience of people confronting poverty in Majority World contexts and considers the factors that connect human communities and ecological systems worldwide, such as globalization, migration, climate change, global health and disease, religious and social movements, and urbanization. Emphasis is given to understanding the theories, methods and effectiveness of diverse approaches to international development and holistic transformation.
HNGR381,Topics in Development, (2 or 4 Credits)| Selected topics from the following: technology and the environment, appropriate technology, and community development. Seminar format with guest lecturers and student presentations. Prerequisites depend on topic.
HNGR385,Field Research Methods and Intercultural Orientation, (4 Credits)| A practical preparation of HNGR Program interns for participatory research and cross-cultural living and service. Emphasis in research is on design and implementation of qualitative and quantitative research methods in actual field settings, including roles, rapport, ethics, cultural adaptations, field notes, and write-up. Emphasis in orientation is on cross-cultural adjustment, including approaches, responses, psychological adaptation, relationship-building, communication, health, and Christian witness. Open to outgoing HNGR interns only. Course fee.
HNGR432,Violence and Peace in Latin America, (4 Credits)| See ANTH 432.
HNGR481,Introduction to Global Christian Perspective, (0 Credits)| Supervised directed reading and reflection, done as part of the HNGR field internship that addresses selected themes in global Christian thought and practice, including poverty and powerlessness, justice and reconciliation, community and community development, and brokenness and healing. This is the summer session of HNGR 484 (Global Christian Perspective), which is taken during the Fall semester. Open to HNGR interns only. Graded pass/fail.
HNGR484,Global Christian Perspective, (4 Credits)| Supervised directed reading and reflection, done as part of the HNGR field internship that addresses selected themes in global Christian thought and practice, including poverty and powerlessness, justice and reconciliation, community and community development, and brokenness and healing. Open to HNGR interns only.
HNGR491,Introduction to Internship in Development, (0 Credits)| Supervised field experience through a six-month internship in the Majority World, generally with a Christian organization involved in holistic development. The program of study is designed to meet the particular interests and needs of the student, host organization, and community in which the internship is conducted. This is the summer session of HNGR 496 (Internship in Development). Open to HNGR interns only. Graded pass/fail.
HNGR494,HNGR Capstone Integration Seminar, (2 Credits)| Evaluation and integration of the student's field experience in the Majority World, applying theories of socioeconomic change, intercultural communication, and Christian worldview, and an analysis of alternative models of holistic development. Open to returned HNGR interns only. Course fee.
HNGR495,Independent Study, (2 to 4 Credits)| Directed reading and research or internship projects.
HNGR496,Internship in Development, (4 to 8 Credits)| Supervised field experience through a six-month internship in the Majority World, generally with a Christian organization involved in holistic development. The program of study is designed to meet the particular interests and needs of the student, host organization, and community in which the internship is conducted.
INTR503,Academic Composition and Communication, (0 Credits)| Group and individual instruction in expository writing and oral communication skills for students from non-English backgrounds. Students receive intensive preparation in English for academic purposes such as research papers and class presentations. Graded pass/fail.
INTR512,Theories and Principles of Counseling, (3 Credits)| See PSYC 512.
INTR514,Spiritual and Professional Formation, (4 Credits)| Introduction to personal and corporate formation through various dimensions such as the intellectual, physical, spiritual, social, and emotional with an emphasis on the integration of biblical perspectives. Transformational practice is encouraged through literature survey and contemporary case studies.
INTR516,Issues and Trends in Missions, (2 or 4 Credits)| Current missiological issues and trends, including church-mission relationships, changes in mission strategies and structures, challenges to the church, and their significance to the worldwide mission of the church. Opportunity for individual student research in a particular area of interest is provided.
INTR521,Historical Foundations, (2 Credits)| Explores key persons and movements in the expansion of the Christian church from early monasticism and the Celtic Church to Moravianism and Methodism. The missiological reinterpretation of church history focuses on the dynamics of the expansion and the implications for contemporary strategies of mission. Attention is given to the means of Holy Spirit renewal, structure of mission, the role of leadership, and the relationship among the three.
INTR526,Global Cities: Cities and the World, (4 Credits)| See IR 362.
INTR531,Theological Foundations, (2 Credits)| Using the principles of biblical exegesis and hermeneutics, the course explores God's mission from the Philistines of Abraham's and David's time, to the marginalized in New Testament society. Through this process, an appreciation is developed for theological reflection in Christian community that will impact the student's missionary vocation.
INTR532,Contextualization in Global Settings, (4 Credits)| Analysis of the encounter of the gospel with culture within the framework of the behavioral sciences. Organized around six dimensions of religious experience and contextualization within those dimensions, with special focus on the theological dimension.
INTR534,Mission in Acts, (4 Credits)| The course models a historical critical interpretation of Acts. Through an analysis of the discourse structure of Luke/Acts, the course seeks to deepen an understanding of the person and work of the Spirit of Jesus who empowers God's mission as it takes place through the apostles and the early church.
INTR535,Holy Spirit and Mission, (2 or 4 Credits)| The course explores the dynamics of the work of the Holy Spirit and mission in relation to the following dimensions: personal, biblical, historical, cultural, contextual, and functional. Students are encouraged to explore their mission philosophy regarding the role of the Spirit of God for their mission context.
INTR546,Evangelism and Church Planting, (2 or 4 Credits)| Strategies for evangelism and church development are examined and applied through case studies, field trips, contacts with resource persons, and student-led projects.
INTR548,Discipleship, (2 Credits)| See CFM 532.
INTR551,Counseling Challenges Ministry, (2 Credits)| See PSYC 551.
INTR552,Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Gender and Leadership, (2 Credits)| An exploration of the role of women in missions, including their impact on mission strategies, their unique contributions, and a discussion of critical issues they have faced since the time of the modern missionary movement.
INTR561,Intercultural Communication, (4 Credits)| Foundational principles of intercultural communication from the fields of social psychology, cultural anthropology, and communication theory integrated with selected areas of personal encounter in cross-cultural settings.
INTR562,Foundations of Intercultural Communication, (2 Credits)| Foundational principles of intercultural communication from the fields of social psychology, cultural anthropology, and communication theory.
INTR563,Cross-Cultural Teaching and Learning, (2 Credits)| Contributions of nonformal educators, cognitive psychologists, and educational anthropologists to cross-cultural teaching and learning; attuning instruction to thinking styles, pedagogical expectations, and cultural values.
INTR565,Folk Religions, (2 or 4 Credits)| Strategies for understanding folk religion and relating to folk religion adherents are examined and applied through discussion, case studies, media, and student-led projects.
INTR566,Religious Life in Global Settings, (4 Credits)| Introduction to religious life through the lenses of phenomenology, folk religious studies, and the social sciences with an emphasis on how average adherents live out their lives integrated with biblical perspectives.
INTR567,Spiritual Conflict, (2 or 4 Credits)| An examination of the principles and dynamics of spiritual conflict. Issues include theoretical considerations in the areas of theological reflection and cultural analysis, pragmatic considerations such as spiritual discipline and counseling approaches, and the missiological implications for missionary strategies.
INTR572,Cross-Cultural Research, (2 or 4 Credits)| The rationale and methodology of qualitative research in cross-cultural contexts. Special focus on the application of qualitative methods to a specific context through research projects.
INTR573,Qualitative Research for Second Language Educators, (2 Credits)| A survey of qualitative research techniques for use in cross-cultural contexts, with a special focus on second language education.
INTR581,Spanish American Culture and Civilization, (4 Credits)| See SPAN 335.
INTR587,East Asian History, (4 Credits)| See HIST 334.
INTR588,Asian Culture & Communication, (2 Credits)| An introduction to Asian history and culture with particular emphasis on the themes/issues of the 20th century. Includes an introduction to a relevant Asian language and language-learning strategies. Principles for effective cross-cultural communication and adjustment are also considered. Taught in Asia.
INTR591,Public Health and Nutrition, (2 Credits)| See BIOL 381.
INTR601,Intro to TEFL Methodology, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the key concepts and skills involved in teaching English as a foreign language (EFL) in Asian classrooms. The course provides a model-based introduction to methods for teaching English as a foreign language with a specific focus on oral communication. Taught in Asia.
INTR606,Descriptive English Grammar: Foundations, (2 Credits)| A survey of the foundational systems of English grammar, including practical issues and procedures involved in teaching grammar to ESL/EFL learners.
INTR607,Descriptive English Grammar: Syntax and Discourse, (2 Credits)| A survey of specialized features of English grammar, including areas of difficulty for English language learners and complex multi-clause structures.
INTR608,Second Language Acquisition, (4 Credits)| Principles and skills for the successful learning of foreign languages, including practical instruction in phonetics and language-learning strategies.
INTR609,Linguistic Science, (2 Credits)| See LING 321.
INTR611,Theoretical Foundations of TESOL Methodology, (4 Credits)| Survey of theory and research relevant to the teaching and learning of English as a second/foreign language. Emphasis on practical applications from linguistics, psycholinguistics, and sociolinguistics.
INTR612,Descriptive English Grammar for TESOL, (4 Credits)| A survey of English grammar and discourse analysis, including practical issues and procedures involved in teaching grammar and discourse to ESL/EFL learners.
INTR613,TESOL Classroom Dynamics Practicum, (2 Credits)| A survey of current research and methodology related to classroom instruction. Includes an analysis of the student's teaching skills in a supervised field placement. Appropriate for both inexperienced and experienced teachers, as well as TESOL administrators.
INTR614,Curriculum and Materials Development for TESOL, (2 Credits)| Principles and practices in the development of curricula for ESL/EFL courses, textbook evaluation, and the management of English language teaching programs.
INTR615,Teaching Reading and Composition to ESL/EFL Learners, (2 Credits)| Theoretical and practical issues involved in teaching reading and composition, including procedures for planning and implementing classroom instruction.
INTR616,English Phonology for ESL/EFL Teachers, (2 Credits)| The sound system of English, including procedures for planning and implementing pronunciation instruction for ESL/EFL learners.
INTR617,Principles of ESL/EFL Assessment, (2 Credits)| See LING 325.
INTR618,English Language Learning Content Methods and Materials, (2 Credits)| See LING 326.
INTR619,Teaching Speaking and Listening to ESL/EFL Learners, (2 Credits)| Specialized training in ESL teaching methods related to oral communication. Includes techniques for the analysis of oral discourse and current methodology related to language-learning strategies and the use of media.
INTR621,Transformational Development, (4 Credits)| The purpose of the course is to explore the biblical, theological, and theoretical foundations for transformational community development and the Christian's involvement in development on the personal and systemic levels. Foundational thinking for practice is developed through a survey of the literature and engagement with current issues and case studies.
INTR622,Cross-cultural Human Development, (2 Credits)| The course will explore Western assumptions about human development and how people grow and change in similar and different ways across cultural contexts and across the lifespan. Topics may include: culture and socialization, physical development, language and cognition, concepts of self and personality, gender, social behavior, family, and health.
INTR623,Families in International Settings, (2 Credits)| The course will explore cultural assumptions about human socialization and family contexts across the globe. Non-Western, Western, indigenous, immigrant, third-culture, and global nomad contexts are examined using interdisciplinary theories and frameworks. Opportunity for individual student research on a topic of interest is provided.
INTR624,Mission to Children and Youth at Risk, (2 Credits)| This course will explore theological, biblical and theoretical principles and frameworks for understanding, analyzing, and responding to difficult situations for children, particularly those in developing nations. The student will apply contextual factors impacting human development (e.g., family, peers, community, educational opportunity, church/religion, cultural belief systems) to understand children's risk and resilience as related to social issues (e.g., poverty, abuse, child labor, human rights, HIV/AIDS, prostitution/sex trafficking, refugees, the girl-child, etc.). Public policies, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and current interventions of Christian NGOs and other child-focused organizations will be explored.
INTR631,Principles of TESOL Teacher Mentoring, (2 Credits)| This course promotes a deeper understanding of how to engage teachers in conversations and activities that encourage professional growth. Teacher mentors will learn how to observe and give feedback to novice teachers and how to make use of a variety of professional development strategies. Taught in Asia.
INTR632,Seminar in TESOL Teacher Mentoring, (2 Credits)| This course helps teacher mentors identify and solve problems within their teaching context. Mentors will develop an understanding of the broad context of education and language education in the country and region where they work and will apply this knowledge as they guide teachers. The mentors will also become skilled at helping teachers conduct research as a means of understanding and solving problems in their classrooms. Taught in Asia.
INTR633,Practicum in Teacher Mentoring, (2 Credits)| Practical experience in teacher mentoring, including observing and giving feedback to teachers, advising them in lesson planning and classroom dynamics, and counseling them about their future teaching situation. Taught in Asia.
INTR634,Adult ESL Literacy, (2 Credits)| Problems and issues in adult literacy, with a specific focus on methodology for teaching immigrants, refugees, and other English language learners, both in the US and abroad.
INTR635,Principles of Materials Development for TESOL, (2 Credits)| Students will gain an understanding of the fundamental terminology, concepts and processes involved in the development of textbooks and other published materials, including web-based and audiovisual materials for English language teaching.
INTR636,Practicum in Materials Development, (2 Credits)| Students will develop materials for an existing project through a step-by-step process which is modeled during a series of class sessions. This will lead to a more extensive individual materials development project for an organization or publisher, under the guidance of the professor or a mentor.
INTR637,Problems and Issues in TESOL Materials Development, (2 Credits)| Students will present materials they have developed for a publisher or organization and will critique the materials developed by others. Discussion of current problems and issues in materials development, both theoretical and practical, will be stimulated by these presentations and the course readings.
INTR642,Bilingual Methods & Materials, (2 Credits)| See LING 323.
INTR643,English Language Learning Methods for Specialists, (2 Credits)| See LING 328.
INTR692,Comprehensive Examination, (0 Credits)| Prerequisite: submission of Candidacy form. Fee $75. Graded pass/fail.
INTR693,Intercultural Studies Capstone, (4 Credits)| In-depth exploration of current issues in intercultural studies. Seminar integrates core content from the INTR program into student's area of interest culminating in an integrative comprehensive paper. Prerequisite: completion of INTR 514, 521, 531, 532, 561 and 621.
INTR694,Seminar In Missions, (2 or 4 Credits)| In-depth study of selected topics growing out of special concerns of professors and students.
INTR695,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| 
INTR696,Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| Graded pass/fail.
INTR698,Thesis/Applied Thesis, (4 Credits)| 
INTR699,Applied Thesis/Thesis Continuation, (0 Credits)| See M.A. Thesis/Applied Thesis/Action Research.
IDS291,Introduction to Interdisciplinary Studies, (2 Credits)| An orientation to the increasingly important work of interdisciplinary thinking, this course is designed to encourage students to become holistic explorers of knowledge and to see the interdependent aspects of all academic disciplines and courses within a liberal arts college.
IDS494,Senior Seminar, (4 Credits)| This capstone course provides the Interdisciplinary Studies major the opportunity for integration by means of interaction with other IDS majors. The seminar requires full participation of students through daily reading, writing, speaking, and listening-conducted according to a central theme and common texts, drawing upon the students' varied academic experiences. An integrative research project is mandatory-one that is qualitative, quantitative, or creative, depending upon the major’s program of study. Required of all IDS majors, and only offered in the spring semester, it should be taken just prior to graduation.
IDS495,Independent Study, (2 Credits)| A regimen of reading scholarly articles and writing abstract reviews is typical; however, this course also provides the IDS major with the opportunity for research to meet the individual’s needs and interests, as approved by the Interdisciplinary Studies director. IDS majors are strongly encouraged to take the IDS independent study prior to the IDS Senior Seminar, providing solid preparation for the final IDS project.
IDS496,Internship, (4 or 8 Credits)| Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing within the Interdisciplinary Studies major.
IR155,Comparative Politics, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the comparative analysis of the political systems of countries around the world. The course will examine the role of political institutions, political participation, and economics in shaping societies. Disciplinary terminology will be combined with case studies of diverse countries from regions such as Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Latin America, and Europe. Legacy diversity designation.
IR175,International Politics, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the politics among states. Themes emphasized include: international security, diplomacy, conflict resolution and war, human rights, international law and organization, and global political economy.
IR301,Topics in International Politics, (2 Credits)| Selected topics, designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of international politics.
IR302,Topics in International Politics, (4 Credits)| Selected topics, designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of international politics.
IR312,Islam & Politics, (4 Credits)| This seminar course focuses on central Islamic concepts relating to politics and the role of Islam in political movements and individual political action. Legacy diversity designation.
IR315,Politics of Global Development, (4 Credits)| This course examines the nature and processes of economic development and political change in less developed countries. Emphasis is given to comparing the political economy of good governance.
IR318,Environmental Politics, (4 Credits)| Contemporary environmental challenges suggest fundamental problems of nature-society relations through socio-physical phenomena such as acid rain, urban air pollution, deforestation, rabid desertification, high rates of extinction, and the prospect of global warming, as well as mounting inequality in threats to human wellbeing generated by these issues. This course engages various perspectives on the politics of these issues, equipping students to 1) understand the ways in which scholars and activists think about enviromental challenges, 2) critically engage such perspectives, and 3)apply such perspectives to the changing landscape of environmental issues.
IR325,Justice Among the Nations, (4 Credits)| This course explores the moral questions occasioned by relationships among and between nations: what are the justifications for (and limits of) national sovreignty? Are there better (morally and practically) alternatives? Should the material wealth of the modern global economy be produced and distributed differently than it is now? When and how may states (or other sorts of political authorities) use military force? How can nations reconcile and act justly after mass atrocities?
IR327,Ethics & Foreign Policy, (2 Credits)| An examination of the role of moral values in foreign policy, with special emphasis on war, human rights, and foreign intervention. Prerequisite: IR 175.
IR328,International Law, (2 Credits)| Analyzes the nature and role of law in the international community through leading case studies.
IR329,Forgiveness & Reconciliation, (2 Credits)| This class explores the potential role of forgiveness in confronting and overcoming systemic regime crimes. The course emphasizes theory and case studies and focuses on processes that foster political reconciliation.
IR347,East Asian Politics, (4 Credits)| Why do democratic and authoritarian countries coexist as neighbors in one of the world's densest trade networks? What explains the great inequalities both within and between East Asian countries? We will explore these questoins in this course. We will examine the historical development of East Asian states and their contemporary domestic and international politics. In this coure, we will investigate the three sub-regions of East Asia: Northeast Asia, China, and Southeast Asia. Finally, contemporary problems of international relations will be discussed ranging from nuclear weapons to island disputes to power transitions away from American hegemony.
IR348,Middle East Politics, (4 Credits)| In this course, students will learn about and analyze the political cultures and political conflicts of the Middle East.
IR356,European Politics, (4 Credits)| A comparative assessment of the politics and government of selected European nations.
IR361,Post-communist Politics, (4 Credits)| A comparison of the post-communist political development of a select number of Central and East European states. Examination is given to both the common Leninist legacies of communism and the great diversity of political practice now found across the region. Special emphasis is given to political institutions, European Union integration, and select contemporary political issues.
IR362,Urban Politics in a Global Age, (4 Credits)| This course examines the effects of globalization on major urban centers in the world system, comparing and contrasting cities in North American, Europe, Africa, and Asia. Students will study the economic, political, and social impact, as well as responses of government and civil society.
IR375,Globalization, (4 Credits)| What are the causes and consequences of globalization? Why do citizens divide on their support and opposition to globalization? How is globalization affect and affected by national politics, history, and cultures? This course will examine the causes of globalization and its effects upon states and citizens. Specifically, we will discuss international trade, migration, growth, development and politics. Taught in conjunction with the Iron Sharpens Iron summer travel program.
IR378,U,S, Foreign Policy, (4 Credits)| An analysis of the processes and institutions involved in making U.S. foreign policy. Emphasis given to understanding the development of contemporary issues.
IR379,International Political Economy, (4 Credits)| An analysis of the interaction of economics and politics at the international level. Topics covered will include the origins and nature of the World Bank, IMF and WTO, regionalization, trade policy, and the world monetary system.
IR494,Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| An analysis of the interrelationship of politics and the Christian faith, focusing on vocational, conceptual, legal, and international public policy issues. Senior majors only.
IR495,Independent Study, (2 to 4 Credits)| A guided individual reading and research problem. Junior and senior majors, or discretion of professor.
IR496,Internship, (4 Credits)| A series of programs designed for practical experience in professions frequently chosen by International Relations majors, such as law, government, and public service. Prerequisite: International Relations major with junior or senior standing and a minimum of 16 credits in the department.
IR499,Honors Thesis, (4 Credits)| An independent research project requiring original research, developed in a scholarly paper and culminating in an oral examination. By application only. The honors thesis may not be counted toward the total hours to complete the major.
LATN101,Elementary Latin I, (4 Credits)| Introduction to syntax and vocabulary. Readings from representative ancient authors.
LATN102,Elementary Latin II, (4 Credits)| Introduction to syntax and vocabulary. Readings from representative ancient authors. Prerequisite LATN 101
LATN201,Intermediate Latin, (4 Credits)| Review of grammar. Translation of extensive selections from Vergil's Aeneid and other poets. Prerequisite: LATN 102 (or equivalent)
LATN333,Advanced Latin Readings, (2 or 4 Credits)| In-depth readings of selections of Latin literature, focusing on the classical periods of the Roman Republic and Empire. Emphasis will be placed on universal human themes expressed in the literature that shed light on cross-cultural connections between the ancient and modern worlds.
LATN341,Ovid's Metamorphoses, (4 Credits)| Intensive readings of selections from Ovid's Metamorphoses, with particular attention to the similarities and differences between Greco-Roman myth and the Bible and to Ovid's historical and cultural context in the age of Augustus. Prerequisite: LATN 201 or competency.
LATN342,Apuleius' Metamorphoses and C,S, Lewis, (4 Credits)| Intensive readings of selections from Apuleius' Metamorphoses, with particular attention to the inset narrative of Cupid and Psyche and Lewis' retelling of it in his novel Till We Have Faces, along with selections from the Latin letters of C.S. Lewis. Prerequisite: LATN 201 or competency.
LATN487,Topics in Latin Language and Literature, (2 Credits)| Varied subjects. Designated studies in specialized genres, literature, culture, comparative studies, or inter-disciplinary studies.
LATN489,Topics in Latin Language and Literature, (4 Credits)| Varied subjects. Designated studies in specialized genres, literature, culture, comparative studies, or inter-disciplinary studies.
LATN492,Independent Study in the Theory and Practice of Latin Pedagogy for Classical Schools, (4 Credits)| An independent course of study that combines observation and guest teaching in a local CCE school with the self-directed study of the history and theory of classical education. Students will develop their own materials for teaching Latin in a CCE school. Prerequisite: LATN 201, Instructor's permission required.
LATN495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Department approval required.
LING222,English Grammar for Teachers, (2 Credits)| A survey of major areas of English grammar with a discussion of the history of the English language and a focus on practical issues for teachers of both English speakers and English language learners.
LING224,Theoretical Foundations of ELL and Bilingual Methodology, (4 Credits)| Survey of theory and research relevant to the teaching and learning of English as a second/foreign language and bilingual education. Emphasis on practical applications from linguistics, psycholinguistics, and sociolinguistics.
LING227,Cross-Cultural Teaching and Learning, (2 Credits)| Contributions of nonformal educators, cognitive psychologists, and educational anthropologists to cross-cultural teaching and learning; attuning the instruction of ELLs to thinking styles, pedagogical expectations, and cultural values.
LING321,Introduction to Linguistics, (2 Credits)| Introductory study of the concepts and methodology of modern linguistics. Survey of the various branches of linguistic science and of their relationships to other disciplines. (Cross-listed with INTR 609)
LING323,Bilingual Methods/Materials, (2 Credits)| Bilingual Methods and Materials. Current methodology and instructional resources for teachers of children in bilingual classrooms, programs, and schools. (Cross-listed with INTR 642)
LING323L,Bilingual Practicum, (1 Credit)| An analysis of teaching skills in a supervised field placement.
LING325,Principles of Assessment for TESOL, (2 Credits)| Theoretical and practical aspects of ESL/EFL testing, including 1) survey of test types, and 2) procedures for test planning, construction, administration, and interpretation of results. (Cross-listed with INTR 617)
LING326,English Language Learning Content Methods and Materials, (2 Credits)| English Language Learning Content Methods and Materials. Contemporary issues and practices in teaching children from non-English-speaking backgrounds in mainstream classrooms, both in the U.S. and abroad. This course is intended for all teachers as well as specialists earning the ESL and bilingual endorsements. (Cross-listed with INTR 618)
LING328,English Language Learning Methods for Specialists, (2 Credits)| English Language Learning Methods for Specialists. A survey of current methodology related to the classroom instruction of English language learners in specialized contexts such as pull-out and sheltered classes.
LING328L,ELL Practicum, (1 Credit)| An analysis of teaching skills in a supervised field placement.
MAFT618,Family Therapy Research & Implications for Evidence-Based Practice, (3 Credits)| An overview of research methodology, data analysis, and the evaluation of research in couple and family therapy and how research informs MFT common factors and evidence-based practice.
MAFT624,MFT Ethics & Professional Practice, (3 Credits)| An overview of ethical issues related to the profession and practice of MFT including the AAMFT Code of Ethics, professional identity, professional organizations, and licensure.
MAFT631,Individual & Family Life Cycle Development, (3 Credits)| The study of individual and family development across the lifespan, exploring continuity and change within the developing individual and family.
MAFT633,Couple Therapy: Systemic Assessment and Intervention, (3 Credits)| An overview of theoretical models and skills necessary for effective treatment of couple relationship and sexual functioning.
MAFT634,Marriage & Family Therapy I: Theoretical Foundations, (3 Credits)| An introduction to historical development, theoretical and empirical foundations of systems theory including a survey of the major models of marriage, couple, and family therapy and an overview of contemporary conceptual directions.
MAFT635,Marriage & Family Therapy II: Systemic Assessment & Intervention, (3 Credits)| An application of relational/systems theory to a variety of presenting clinical problems including but not limited to physical health and illness, major mental health issues, traditional psychodiagnostic categories, and relational problems.
MAFT637,Families in Context: Culture class ethnicity gender sexual identity & religion, (3 Credits)| An overview of the impact of diversity, power, and privilege as they related to culture, class, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, and religion in families and their influence on couple and family treatment.
MAFT642,Psychopathology & the Family, (3 Credits)| The study of the etiology and maintenance of the major mental disorders and the role of the family and community in assessment and intervention. The DSM-IV-TR classification system and the biological bases of behavior are given special attention.
MAFT645,Systemic Interventions with Children and Adolescents, (3 Credits)| An examination of systemic models of conceptualizing child and adolescent problems and an introduction to systemic treatment modalities for working with children, adolescents and their families.
MAFT655,Systemic Interventions with Special Populations, (3 Credits)| Abusive families, families with addictions, domestic violence, and under-resourced families. An advanced skills course providing theory and techniques for treatment of special populations in marriage and family therapy.
MAFT656,Integration seminar: MFT and Christian faith/practice, (3 Credits)| An advanced seminar examining historical and contemporary issues in the integration of Christian faith, systemic epistemology, and the practice of Marriage and Family Therapy.
MAFT661,Personal and Professional Development Group (PPDG) I, (0 Credits)| A small group class focusing on development of MFT identity, person of the therapist issues, group dynamics, and spiritual formation.
MAFT662,Personal and Professional Development Group (PPDG) II, (0 Credits)| A small group class focusing on development of MFT identity, person of the therapist issues, group dynamics, and spiritual formation.
MAFT663,Personal and Professional Development Group (PPDG) III, (0 Credits)| A small group class focusing on development of MFT identity, person of the therapist issues, group dynamics, and spiritual formation.
MAFT664,Personal and Professional Development Group (PPDG) IV, (0 Credits)| A small group class focusing on development of MFT identity, person of the therapist issues, group dynamics, and spiritual formation.
MAFT691,Advanced Clinical Practicum, (0 to 3 Credits)| This course is an advanced marriage and family therapy practicum. It is designed to provide supervision and counseling experience for the development of clinical skills in working with couples and families. Prerequisites: MAFT 696, 697, 698 and 699. Graded pass/fail. Repeatable. (0-3 each semester)
MAFT696,Clinical Pre-Practicum I, (1 Credit)| First year clinical practicum focusing on observation of clinical work and development of beginning MFT skills. Graded pass/fail.
MAFT697,Clinical Pre-Practicum II, (1 Credit)| First year clinical practicum focusing on observation of clinical work and development of beginning MFT skills. Graded pass/fail.
MAFT698,Clinical Practicum I, (2 Credits)| Second year clinical practicum in which students secure outside placements and provide couple and family therapy under supervision by professionals on site. In addition, students received another hour supervision per week on campus by faculty AAMFT Approved Supervisors. Graded pass/fail (2 each semester)
MAFT699,Clinical Practicum II, (2 Credits)| Second year clinical practicum in which students secure outside placements and provide couple and family therapy under supervision by professionals on site. In addition, students received another hour supervision per week on campus by faculty AAMFT Approved Supervisors. Graded pass/fail (2 each semester)
MATH106,Mathematics for the Benefit of Mission and Society, (4 Credits)| An overview of how mathematics benefits the mission of the Church and society worldwide, with special regard for those who are suffering and/or marginalized. Examples will be drawn both from history and our contemporary world.
MATH107,Finite Mathematics and Applications, (4 Credits)| Designed to provide the mathematical tools that a college graduate is likely to encounter in his or her work. Core topics include systems of linear equations, mathematics of finance, and basic probability and statistics. Additional topics may include game theory for decision making, linear programming, iterated processes, or networks. Extensive use of spreadsheet programs. The course illustrates the relevance of mathematics to life applications by taking real or realistic examples from business, economics, social sciences, and life sciences.
MATH125,Mathematics for Elementary and Middle Grade Education, (4 Credits)| Numeration systems, set theory, the whole number, integer number, and rational number systems with associated axioms, operations, relations, and counting principles. Topics from geometry, measurement, logic, and probability and statistics. For elementary education majors only.
MATH131,Precalculus, (4 Credits)| A course in elementary functions intended to prepare students for MATH 221 or MATH 231. Topics include the properties of the real number system, inequalities and absolute values, functions and their graphs, solutions of equations, polynomial functions, trigonometric functions, exponential, and logarithm functions. Emphasis on using functions to model physical or social systems.
MATH221,Applied Calculus, (4 Credits)| This course covers the ideas of calculus, emphasizing applications to business and the social sciences. It includes a wider range of topics than MATH 231 but with less depth of coverage. Topics include limits, definitions and applications of the derivative and integral, and functions of one or more variables. Prerequisite: MATH 131 or Precalculus competence. This course does not count towards the mathematics major. Only one of MATH 221 or MATH 231 may be taken for credit.
MATH231,Calculus I, (4 Credits)| This course covers differential and integral calculus of functions of a single real variable, including trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions. Derivatives and integrals are studied symbolically, graphically, and numerically. Applications of calculus are emphasized throughout the course. Three lectures, two hours drill. Prerequisite: MATH 131 or precalculus competence (see Calculus Readiness Assessment).
MATH232,Calculus II, (4 Credits)| Infinite series, polar coordinates and parametric curves. Three-dimensional geometry and vector algebra, functions of two variables, partial differentiation, double integration. Applications of these topics are emphasized throughout the course. Three lectures, two hours drill. Prerequisite: MATH 231 or 233 with a minimum grade of C-, or AP Calculus AB score of 4 or 5, or BC score of 3.
MATH233,Calculus I B, (2 Credits)| This is a 2-hour course that covers the B-Quad material of MATH 231. It meets concurrently with MATH 231 in B-Quad. Three lectures, two hours drill. Prerequisite: AP Calculus AB score of 3 or BC score of 2.
MATH234,Calculus II B, (2 Credits)| This is a 2-hour course that covers the B-Quad material of MATH 232. Prerequisite: AP Calculus BC score of 4 or 5.
MATH243,Discrete Mathematics and Functional Programming, (4 Credits)| See CSCI 243.
MATH245,Linear Algebra, (4 Credits)| Starting with solving systems of linear equations, matrix algebra is used to explore vector spaces and linear transformations. Emphasis is given to bases, dimension, eigenvectors, and orthogonality. Prerequisite: MATH 231 or 233.
MATH263,Introduction to Statistics, (4 Credits)| An introduction to statistics, sampling theory, and statistical decision making from a solid mathematical basis for non-mathematics majors. Topics chosen from discrete and continuous distributions, moments, hypothesis testing, correlation and multiple correlation, regression (linear, multivariate, logistic), ANOVA, contingency tables with tests for independence, sampling theory, and rudimentary non-parametric statistics. Students will use selected software packages for data processing and analysis. Prerequisite: MATH 131 or Precalculus knowledge.
MATH301,Intro to Upper-Level Math, (2 Credits)| Introduction to learning and communication processes used in upper-level mathematics: primary literature sources, presenting mathematics in writing and orally using specialized software. The vocation of a mathematician: ongoing research developments, professional opportunities in academia and in the industry. Prerequisite: MATH 231 or 233. For sophomore or junior math or applied math majors only.
MATH302,Applied Project I, (2 Credits)| Submission of Applied Project proposal. Preliminary draft of research project including problem statement, scope of project, background, design and methodology in consultation with faculty project advisor(s). Prequisite: MATH 301.
MATH314,Problem Solving Seminar, (2 Credits)| Mathematical problem solving aimed at students who enjoy solving problems in a variety of areas of mathematics, and who would like to strengthen their creative mathematical thinking. Students are required to take the William Lowell Putnam Undergraduate Mathematics Competition. Prerequisites: MATH 232 or 234, and 245.
MATH324,Methods of Teaching Mathematics, (2 Credits)| Theories and methods for teaching mathematics at the secondary level. Topics include cooperative learning, classroom management, and creative teaching ideas. Consideration of current math technology and curriculum standards. Required of mathematics majors in WheTEP, prior to student teaching. Prerequisite: Acceptance to WheTEP.
MATH325,Methods of Teaching Middle Grade Mathematics, (2 Credits)| Theories and methods for teaching mathematics at the middle grade level. Topics include effective teaching strategies, planning, and assessment of math content. Based on the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics and the Illinois Professional Teaching Standards. Prerequisite: Acceptance to WheTEP.
MATH331,Vector Calculus, (2 Credits)| Vector algebra, properties of transformations, curves and surfaces, line, surface, and volume integrals, Green's, Stokes', and the divergence theorems. Prerequisite: MATH 232 or 234.
MATH333,Differential Equations, (4 Credits)| An introduction into the theory, methods of solution, and selected applications of ordinary differential equations. Topics include first order equations, second order linear equations with constant coefficients, numerical analysis of ordinary differential equations, Laplace Transforms, series solutions, and systems of differential equations. Prerequisite: MATH 232 or 234.
MATH341,Modern Algebra, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the theory of groups, rings, and fields. Topics in group theory include Lagrange’s theorem, quotient groups, applications to geometry, public key cryptography, and finitely generated abelian groups. Topics in ring theory include ideals, quotient rings, and polynomial rings. Topics in field theory include field extensions, Euclidean construction problems, cubic and quartic equations. Prerequisites: MATH 245 or consent of instructor.
MATH343,Discrete Mathematics, (4 Credits)| Basic and advanced topics selected from sets and logic, Boolean algebra, functions, algorithms, relations and recursion, combinatorics, graph theory, nature of proof, number theory and cryptography. Prerequisite: MATH 231, 233 or consent of instructor. Offered spring of even-numbered years.
MATH351,Analysis I, (4 Credits)| Derivation of the properties of continuity, differentiability, integrability, and convergence by use of the limit concept and basic axioms of the real number field. Prerequisites: MATH 232 (or MATH 234) and MATH 245, or consent of instructor.
MATH352,Complex Analysis, (4 Credits)| An introduction to functions of a complex variable. Topics include the algebra and geometry of complex numbers, mappings of the complex plane, elementary analytic functions, complex functions defined by power series, and differentiation and integration of complex functions. Prerequisite: MATH 331 (MATH 351 recommended). Offered spring of odd-numbered years.
MATH362,Geometry, (4 Credits)| Selected topics from finite, affine, projective, Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry from both the axiomatic and transformation approaches. Prerequisite: MATH 245. Offered spring of odd-numbered years.
MATH363,Probability and Statistics I, (4 Credits)| An introduction to probability theory, including discrete and continuous distributions. Topics covered include independence, conditional probability, expectation, variance and covariance, random vectors, and the central limit theorem. Prerequisite: MATH 232 (or MATH 234) and MATH 245.
MATH364,Mathematical Modeling, (4 Credits)| A course designed to develop an appreciation for, an understanding of, and a facility in the use of mathematics in the social and life sciences. Particular problems in political science, ecology, psychology, sociology, economics, anthropology, epidemiology, and business management provide the motivation for the development of tools and techniques employed throughout applied mathematics. Prerequisites: MATH 232 (or MATH 234) and MATH 245.
MATH385,Topics in Applied Mathematics, (4 Credits)| A topic selected for each semester in which the course is offered that focuses upon a particular applied mathematics discipline in a way that brings important mathematical theory and methods to practice. Possibilities include Numerical Analysis, Dynamical Systems, Applied Linear Algebra, Operations Research, Cryptography, or Applied Discrete Math. Prerequisites: MATH 232 (or MATH 234) and MATH 245 or consent of instructor.
MATH394,Seminar, (2 Credits)| Study of a topic of mathematics not covered in the other courses. May be retaken when different topics are offered. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Offered on demand. Last offering was topology.
MATH441,Algebra II, (4 Credits)| Advanced group theory, including group actions and Sylow topics. Module theory with selected applications. Galois theory of field extensions. Multivariable polynomial rings with applications of Groebner bases. Introduction to the concept of categories. Prerequisite: MATH 341. Offered fall of even-numbered years.
MATH451,Analysis II, (2 or 4 Credits)| Study of topics from real analysis. Prequisite: MATH 351. Alternate years.
MATH463,Probability & Statistics II, (4 Credits)| Starting from a review of probability distributions and their underlying assumptions and features, this course focuses upon statistical inference and data analysis. Topics will be chosen from parametric hypothesis testing, ANOVA, contingency tables and tests for independence, regression techniques and some Bayesian/non-parametric methodology. Prerequisite: MATH 363.
MATH485,Advanced Topics in Mathematics, (4 Credits)| Selected topics from advanced mathematics, such as Number Theory, Partial Differential Equations, or Differential Geometry. Prerequisite: MATH 245.
MATH493,Mentored Research Seminar, (2 or 4 Credits)| Faculty and student collaboration on a project of mutual interest. Limited enrollment - faculty approval required.
MATH494,Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| 494-1. (Section 1) Mathematics and Its Foundation. A study of the historical development of the main ideas in mathematics, with an emphasis on the nineteenth-century developments in axiomatics, logic, number and set theory which led to the twentieth-century developments in the philosophy and foundations of mathematics. As a Christ at the Core Capstone course, students will actively participate in this learning experience by extensive reading, group discussions and several written assignments. Prerequisites: Senior standing in the mathematics major, MATH 341 and 351.; 494-2. (Section 2) Applied Mathematics Senior Seminar. Christ at the Core Capstone course integrating the applied math program with liberal arts learning. Historical survey and current applications of important mathematical equations and models. Applied project work and oral presentations connecting applied mathematics with other disciplines, humanitarian organizations, and/or faith-based mission in under-served communities, and also with Christ at the Core learning. Reflection on diverse and distinctive callings of Christian mathematicians and the Christ at the Core student calling to grow in knowledge, wisdom and Christian character. Prerequisites: Senior standing in the applied math major including MATH 302, or consent of instructor.
MATH495,Problems In Mathematics, (1 to 4 Credits)| Independent study for senior majors. A maximum of two hours can be applied to the major.
MATH496,Internship, (1 to 4 Credits)| Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with Mathematics or Applied Mathematics major.
MSCI101,Introduction to the Army and Critical Thinking, (2 Credits)| This course introduces cadets to the personal challenges and competencies that are critical for effective leadership. Cadets learn how the personal development of life skills such as critical thinking, goal setting, time management, physical fitness, and stress management relate to leadership, officership, and the Army profession. The focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of Army leadership dimensions while gaining a big picture understanding of the ROTC program, its purpose in the Army, and its advantages for the student. Emphasis on hands-on learning also includes blocks of instruction on map reading, orienteering, marksmanship, and rappelling, as well as weekly leadership laboratories, one weekend field trip, and physical training. Upon completion of this semester, the cadets should be prepared to receive more complex leadership instruction. Corequisite: MSCI 123. Fall only.
MSCI102,Introduction to the Profession of Arms, (2 Credits)| This course overviews leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problem solving, listening, presenting briefs, providing feedback, and using effective writing skills. Cadets explore dimensions of leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions in the context of practical, hands-on, and interactive exercises. Cadre role models and the building of stronger relationships among the cadets through common experience, and practical interaction are critical aspects of the MSCI 102 experience. Course includes weekly leadership lab, one weekend field trip, and physical training. Corequisite: MSCI 123. Spring only.
MSCI103,Basic Camp, (0 or 4 Credits)| This course is a 29-day summer training course conducted at Fort Knox, Kentucky, designed to teach the fundamentals of soldiering and leadership and to enhance personal confidence using practical, hands-on exercises including: land navigation, rifle marksmanship, first aid, individual and unit tactics, obstacle courses, and rappelling. Basic Camp is required of all students who have signed an ROTC contract to attend following their freshman year. Military pay approximately $750 (Optional four hours credit. Special tuition charge $25.) Summer. Departmental Approval Required. (0, 4)
MSCI123,Leadership Laboratory, (0 Credits)| Practical application of military skills taught in MSCI basic and advanced courses. Hands-on training in basic soldier’s skills, squad and platoon tactics, weapons, communications, and organizational leadership. Corequisite for MSCI 101/MSCI 102, MSCI 201/MSCI 202, MSCI 301/MSCI 302, MSCI 401/MSCI 402. Graded pass/fail.
MSCI201,Leadership and Decision Making, (2 Credits)| This course explores the dimensions of creative and innovative tactical leadership strategies and styles by examining team dynamics and two historical leadership theories that form the basis of the Army leadership framework. Cadets practice aspects of personal motivation and team building in the context of planning, executing, and assessing team exercises and participating in leadership labs. Focus is on continued development of the knowledge of leadership values and attributes through an understanding of Army rank, structure, and duties and basic aspects of land navigation and squad tactics. Case studies provide tangible context for learning the Soldier’s Creed and Warrior Ethos in the contemporary operating environment. The course also includes one weekend field trip, weekly leadership laboratories, and physical training. Corequisite: MSCI 123. Fall only.
MSCI202,Army Doctrine and Team Development, (2 Credits)| This course examines the challenges of leading tactical teams in the contemporary operating environment (COE). The course highlights dimensions of terrain analysis, patrolling, and operation orders. Further study of the theoretical basis of the Army leadership framework explores the dynamics of adaptive leadership in the context of military operations and what impact does this framework have for the officer. MSCI 202 provides a smooth transition into MSCI 301. Cadets develop greater self-awareness as they assess their own leadership styles and practice communication and team building skills. COE case studies give insight into the importance and practice of teamwork and tactics in real-world scenarios. This includes one weekend field trip, weekly leadership laboratories, and physical training. Corequisite: MSCI 123. Spring only.
MSCI211,American Military History, (2 Credits)| Introduces cadets to American military history using principles of warfare, threads of continuity, and battle analysis. Additionally, cadets will investigate implications of historical lessons in American warfare. This course is required for commissioning. Fall only.
MSCI301,Training Management and the Warfighting Functions, (4 Credits)| MSCI 301 challenges cadets to study, practice, and evaluate adaptive leadership skills as they are presented with challenging scenarios related to squad tactical operation. Cadets receive systematic and specific feedback on their leadership attributes and actions. Based on such feedback, as well as their own self-evaluations, cadets continue to develop their leadership and critical thinking abilities. Additional emphasis will be placed on ethical decision-making. The focus is developing cadets’ tactical leadership abilities to enable them to succeed at the summer - Cadet Leader Course (Advanced Camp), MSCI 303. Course includes weekly leadership lab, one weekend field trip, and physical training. Prerequisite: Basic Course credit; Corequisite: MSCI 123. Fall only.
MSCI302,Applied Leadership in the Small Unit Operations, (4 Credits)| MSCI 302 uses increasingly intense situational leadership challenges to build cadet awareness and skills in leading small units. Skills in decision-making, persuading and motivating team members when under fire are explored, evaluated, and developed. Aspects of military operations are reviewed as a means of preparing for Advanced Camp. Cadets are expected to apply basic principles of biblical ethics, the Law of Land Warfare, Army training, and motivation to troop leading procedures. Emphasis is also placed on conducting military briefings and developing proficiency in garrison operation orders. MSCI 302 cadets are evaluated on what they know and do as leaders. Cadets will learn the importance of the value of being a leader of character. Course includes weekly leadership lab, one weekend field trip, and physical training. Prerequisite: MSCI 301; Corequisite: MSCI 123. Spring only.
MSCI303,Advanced Camp, (0 or 4 Credits)| Approximately 6,500 cadets nationwide will attend Advanced Camp at Fort Knox, Kentucky, each year. The 29-day course starts with individual training and leads to collective training, building from simple to complex tasks. This building-block approach permits integration of previously-learned skills into follow-on training. This logical, common-sense training sequence is maintained for each training cycle. Every day at Advanced Camp is a day of training. Cadets are paid a per diem while attending. Prerequisite: MSCI 302. (Optional four hours credit. Special tuition charge $25.) Summer (0, 4)
MSCI401,The Army Officer, (4 Credits)| MSCI 401 develops cadet proficiency in planning, executing, and assessing complex operations, functioning as a member of a staff, and providing performance feedback to subordinates. Cadets assess risk, make ethical decisions, and lead fellow ROTC cadets. Cadets will learn how to effectively mentor subordinate leaders professionally. Cadets learn the art of Mission Command and understand the tenets of the Army as a profession. Lessons on military justice and personnel processes prepare cadets to make the transition to Army officers. MSCI 401 cadets analyze, evaluate, instruct cadets at lower levels. Both their classroom and battalion leadership experiences are designed to prepare MSCI 401 cadets for their first unit of assignment. They identify responsibilities of key staff, coordinate staff roles, and use situational opportunities to teach, train, and develop subordinates. Course includes weekly leadership lab, one weekend field trip, and physical training. Prerequisite: MSCI 302; Corequisite: MSCI 123. Fall only.
MSCI402,Company Grade Leadership, (4 Credits)| This course explores the dynamics of leading in the complex situations of current military operations in the contemporary operating environment. Cadets examine differences in customs and courtesies, military law, principles of war, and rules of engagement in the face of international terrorism. They also explore aspects of interacting in other cultures, with intergovernmental agencies and nongovernmental organizations. The course places significant emphasis on preparing cadets for their first unit of assignment as a company grade officer. The course emphasizes case studies, scenarios, and exercises to prepare cadets to face the complex ethical and practical demands of leading as commissioned officers in the United States Army. Course includes weekly leadership lab, one weekend field trip, and physical training. Prerequisite: MSCI 401; Corequisite: MSCI 123. Spring only.
MSCI494,Leadership Principles, (2 Credits)| Focuses on leadership theory and principles. Cadet will choose texts from a Professional Reading list selected by the Army which will emphasize leadership lessons and principles. Departmental Approval Required.
MSCI495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Typically offered to students whose course work requires more than 8 semesters to complete. Departmental Approval Required.
MIN547,Preaching, (2 Credits)| This course lays the biblical and theological foundations for preaching and develops preaching skills with an emphasis on faithfulness, contextualization and mission, clarity and structural soundness, and spiritual power. The theological, conceptual, and practical role of media, drama, the arts, metaphor, and symbol will also be explored.
MIN558,Personal Leadership and Development in Ministry, (4 Credits)| Explores dimensions of personal leadership development and competencies. Overviews Biblical foundations and spiritual disciplines for effective and God centered leadership. Uses various personality, temperament and assessment tools and examines developmental perspectives on leadership over the lifespan.
MIN559,Organizational Change and Leadership in Ministry, (4 Credits)| Explores models and principles of change leadership, leading organizations, building teams, handling conflict, and fostering entrepreneurial environments within a ministry setting. Examines the leadership literature on these issues. Utilizes case studies and group experiences.
MIN561,Congregational Leadership: Worship Discipleship and Care, (4 Credits)| In various ways, congregational culture affects the shaping of the identity, mission and formation of all local churches. In this course, we will seek to define, exegete, and evaluate congregational culture in order to identify helpful leadership approaches for worship, discipleship, and pastoral care that can support congregational formation and mission.
MIN692,Comprehensive Exam, (0 Credits)| Prerequisite: submission of Candidacy form. Fee $75. Graded pass/fail.
MISS562,Launching Apostolic Movements, (4 Credits)| Focuses on developing an overview of what constitutes a missional movement by gaining a working understanding and analysis of the key elements that have often coalesced in order to catalyze missional movements in Western and majority world contexts, both historically and in more contemporary times.
MISS564,Planting and Growing Reproducing Churches, (2 Credits)| Investigates models, principles, strategies, and methodologies for planting new churches in North America that have an apostolic ethos of continual reproduction. Surveys Biblical materials on church planting, examines the recent literature and resources, and explores networks of church planting organizations and churches
MISS565,Incarnational Ministry for Missional Churches, (2 Credits)| Explicates the basic components of missional communities, including communion, community and mission, that emphasize entering into communities and cultures and sectors of society, rather than drawing people out of their communities, contexts, and roles into siloed religious communities.
MISS568,Organic and Simple Church, (2 Credits)| Explores the dynamics of cell, simple, organic, and house church movements both here in North America and in other parts of the world. Special attention will be paid to multiplication factors, contextual influences, resourcing issues, organizational centralization and decentralization forces, and leadership patterns.
MISS575,Urban Missional Movements, (2 Credits)| Examines creative urban missional reproducing movements, paying special attention to the unique opportunities, challenges, and contexts of larger urban communities. Students will gain a knowledge of urban contexts, and explore ways the church can interact with those contexts in missional engagement.
MISS576,Missional Movements and Evangelism, (2 Credits)| Explores a research based understanding of various missional expressions and movements, learning to assess strengths and weaknesses of the various movements and expressions, and examining effective and ineffective evangelism dynamics.
MISS692,Comprehensive Exam, (0 Credits)| Prerequisite: submission of Candidacy form. Graded pass/fail.
MUCS101,Introduction to Music: Historical Perspective, (2 Credits)| A chronological-historical approach toward an understanding of music with a focus primarily upon great musical works of the Western tradition, and the development of a coherent, Christ-centered, theology of the Arts. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAM. (2)
MUCS102,Introduction to Music: Interdisciplinary Perspective, (2 Credits)| A topical-interdisciplinary approach toward an understanding of music with a focus primarily upon great musical works of the Western tradition, and the development of a coherent, Christ-centered, theology of the Arts. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAM.
MUCS103,Introduction to Music: World Music & Sociology of Sound, (2 Credits)| A sociological approach toward an understanding of music with a focus upon Global/World music, and the development of a coherent, Christ-centered, theology of the Arts. Legacy diversity designation. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAM.
MUCS261,Music Before 1600, (2 Credits)| Focus on repertories, development of polyphony, notational systems, values, and performance-practice issues. Emphasis on philosophical mindsets, iconography, major composers, sources, printing, bibliographic aids. Ties to modern compositional process. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUCS262,Baroque and Classical Music Eras, (4 Credits)| Major trends, issues, and concepts of taste, aesthetics, and expression in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century music. The rise of new dramatic and instrumental media and forms; issues of performance-practice, improvisation, and ornamentation. Focus on media, composers, with attention to matters of musical structure and style. The issue of stylistic overlap and transition in music. Offered fall semester only.
MUCS263,Nineteenth-Century Music, (2 Credits)| Impact of literature, nature, and nationalism on music; programmatic elements. Emphasis on social history, composers, works, genres, style, and performance-practice. The rise of scholarship; post-romanticism. Offered spring semester only.
MUCS264,World Music, (2 Credits)| A survey of world music; cultural contexts and approaches to the study of indigenous music. Legacy diversity designation. Offered fall semester only.
MUCS275,Musical Theater London, (2 Credits)| Offered as part of the Arts in London program. Students will explore Musical Theater as a communication art form. Emphasis will be placed on understanding historical development, establishing criteria for evaluating live performance, and developing basic presentation skills. Cross-listed with COMM 275. Alternate years; offered summer in even years. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAM.
MUCS321,Church Music Practices, (2 Credits)| A course focusing on the integration of music performance and literature with the Christian faith. Emphasis upon the biblical and theological foundations of church music and related arts, worship practices, and issues from Old Testament and New Testament times through the present day. Hymnology and church music literature across a variety of performance media and periods. Materials and methods for the church musician. Alternate Years; offered spring in odd years.
MUCS322,English Cathedral Music, (2 Credits)| Offered as part of Arts in London program, the course will explore English cathedral music repertoire in an intensive on-site experience. Emphasis will be placed on the music literature in its actual historical context. Alternate years; offered summer in even years.
MUCS323,Piano Literature, (2 Credits)| Historical overview of materials of the harpsichord, clavichord, and piano to the present day. Brief attention to the function of the piano in the church. The literatures in survey; focus on typologies. Alternate years; offered fall in even years.
MUCS324,Art Song Literature, (2 Credits)| Definition and development of the lied, melodie, lirica da camera, and British and American art song to the present time; discussions of the form as it relates to Spanish, Scandinavian, and Slavic contributions. Alternate years; offered fall in odd years.
MUCS326,Solo String Literature, (2 Credits)| Survey of the major concerto, sonata, and concert repertoire for violin, viola, and cello. Alternate years; offered fall in odd years. (lin)
MUCS327,Woodwind Literature, (2 Credits)| (Section 1) 327-1. Flute. Historical overview of the flute. Survey of the major repertoire. Offered fall semester only. lin; (Section 2) 327-2. Single Reeds. Historical overview of the single reed instruments. Survey of the major repertoire. Offered fall semester only. lin; (Section 3) 327-3. Double Reeds. Historical overview of the double reed instruments. Survey of the major repertoire. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUCS328,Brass Literature, (2 Credits)| (Section 1) 328-1. Trumpet. Historical overview of the trumpet. Survey of the major repertoire. Offered fall semester only. lin; (Section 2) 328-2. Horn. Historical overview of the horn. Survey of the major repertoire. Offered fall semester only. lin ;(Section 3) 328-3. Low Brass. Historical overview of the low brass instruments. Survey of the major repertoire. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUCS329,Percussion Literature, (1 to 2 Credits)| Tutorial under the supervision of the primary teacher. Offered fall semester only.
MUCS331,Organ Literature and Performance Practice, (3 Credits)| Survey of organ music and historical organ performance practices of all major periods. Alternate years; offered fall in odd years.
MUCS335,Music of the African Diaspora, (2 Credits)| A general overview of major African-derived musical practices scattered throughout the world. Emphasis on the diasporal unities that are common features in style traits, representative genres, and social trends present in music of the Americas, Caribbean, and Africa. Alternate years; offered fall in even years. Legacy diversity designation.
MUCS336,Music of Oceania & Indonesia, (2 Credits)| An overview of musical practice, values and perspectives found throughout Oceania and Indonesia. Alternate years; offered spring in odd years. Legacy diversity designation.
MUCS355,American Music, (2 Credits)| An historical overview of the major musical genres, styles, and performers of music of the United States; focuses on concert music, folk music, popular music, jazz, and other forms of social music in the United States. Alternate years; offered spring in odd years.
MUCS356,Jazz History, (2 Credits)| Provides a general overview of the major jazz styles prominent in the United States during the 20th century. Particular attention is given the role of instrumental performance trends, the emergence of representative genres, key performers, and social trends that influenced jazz. Alternate years; offered spring in even years. Legacy diversity designation.
MUCS361,Twentieth-Century Music, (4 Credits)| Consideration of prominent streams of musical practice, important contributors, along with related issues and controversies of the twentieth century. Emphasis on significant works and emerging stylistic elements. Offered spring semester only.
MUCS363,Introduction to Music Research and Bibliography, (2 Credits)| Techniques in musical research with attention to data control, writing style, and format procedures. Major categories of musical bibliography, including comprehensive exposure to reference sources. Selected problems in music history requiring bibliographic solution. Manuscript work, major institutional collection; issues and sources in the history of music theory and criticism. Alternate years; offered fall in even years.
MUCS421,Chamber Literature, (2 Credits)| Major contributions in the genre to the present day. Alternate years; offered spring in odd years.
MUCS422,Choral Literature, (2 Credits)| Major contributions in the genre to the present day. Emphasis on repertoire control and stylistic analysis of representative works. Alternate years; offered spring in even years.
MUCS424,Opera Literature, (2 Credits)| Survey of the genre from its inception circa 1600 to the present. Coverage of major works with in-depth examination of representative examples. Video presentations regularly included. Alternate years; offered fall in even years.
MUCS425,Symphonic Literature, (2 Credits)| Survey of the field, focusing on major contributions from the eighteenth century to the present. Emphasis on repertoire control and stylistic analysis of representative works. Corollary ties to the development of the symphony orchestra. Alternate years; offered fall in odd years.
MUCS433,Style Analysis, (2 Credits)| Major structural processes in music, and relations to surrounding theoretical and aesthetic principles. Criteria for critical analysis, hearing, and assimilation. Selected works representing crucial stylistic principles. Includes a focus on integrative issues, such as ties between rhetoric and music, artifice and expression, and humor as a form determinant. Alternate years; offered spring in even years.
MUCS434,Seminar in Context Studies, (2 Credits)| Topics will change on a rotational basis. Examples include: Studies in Bach; Studies in Mozart; Studies in Stravinsky; the Renaissance Mass and Motet; Concerto literature; Studies in American music; Studies in jazz; in-depth analysis of specific issues, including research on cutting-edge scholarship; applications to performance practice, and interdisciplinary studies. Alternate years; offered spring in odd years. (lin)
MUCS494,Senior Capstone, (2 Credits)| An integrative approach connecting students' shared core experiences with their understanding of the aesthetic, cultural, and vocational issues within a diverse musical landscape. Open to senior music majors. Fall semester only.
MUCS495,Directed Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Independent, directed research in selected field of music history and literature.
MUEP213,Women's Chorale, (0 or 1 Credits)| Open to all female students by audition. A performance ensemble engaging in and exploring choral literature for women's voices; performance experiences in diverse venues on and off campus. Graded pass/fail. (1 credit per year. Students register for 0 credits for fall semester and 1 credit for spring semester.)
MUEP214,Men's Glee Club, (0 or 1 Credits)| Open to all male students by audition. A performance ensemble engaging in and exploring choral literature for men's voices; performance experiences in diverse venues on and off campus. Graded pass/fail. (1 credit per year. Students register for 0 credits for fall semester and 1 credit for spring semester.)
MUEP215,Concert Choir, (0 or 1 Credits)| Open to all students by audition. A performance ensemble serving the undergraduate music curriculum with performance of choral literature of all musical styles and traditions; performance experiences in diverse venues on and off campus. Graded pass/fail. (1 credit per year. Students register for 0 credits for fall semester and 1 credit for spring semester.)
MUEP216,Symphonic Band, (0 or 1 Credits)| Open to all students by audition. A performance ensemble engaging in and exploring band music; performance experiences in diverse venues on and off campus. Graded pass/fail. (1 credit per year. Students register for 0 credits for fall semester and 1 credit for spring semester.)
MUEP217,Symphony Orchestra, (0 or 1 Credits)| Open to all students by audition. A performance ensemble engaging in and exploring orchestral music from the 18th century to the present; performance experiences in diverse venues on and off campus. Graded pass/fail. (1 credit per year. Students register for 0 credits for fall semester and 1 credit for spring semester.)
MUEP218,Jazz Ensemble, (0 or 1 Credits)| Open to all students by audition. For music majors, may only fulfill up to two hours (four semesters) of large ensemble requirement. Graded pass/fail. (1 credit per year. Students register for 0 credits for fall semester and 1 credit for spring semester. Exceptions will be handled administratively.)
MUEP219,Recital & Concert Attendance, (0 Credits)| Required of all music majors and minors. Repeated according to the requirements set forth in the Conservatory Handbook. Graded pass/fail. Fall, Spring
MUEP261,Opera Orchestra, (0 Credits)| Instrumentalists accompany the Opera Music Mainstage production at the beginning of Spring semester. Corequisite: MUEP 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, or 218.
MUEP311,Studio Accompaniment, (1 to 2 Credits)| Practical experience playing for lessons, related solo classes, general recitals, and juries with a variety of students and applied faculty. Prerequisite MUMS 313. 2-hour maximum for MUEP 311, 312, 321, 322 per academic year. May be repeated. (lin)
MUEP312,Studio Accompaniment, (1 to 2 Credits)| Practical experience playing for lessons, related solo classes, general recitals, and juries with a variety of students and applied faculty. Prerequisite MUMS 313. 2-hour maximum for MUEP 311, 312, 321, 322 per academic year. May be repeated. (lin)
MUEP321,Recital Accompaniment, (1 to 2 Credits)| Practical experience preparing and performing recitals with various instruments/voices. Prerequisite MUMS 313, MUEP 311, 312, or permission of instructor. 2-hour maximum for MUEP 311, 312, 321, 322 per academic year. May be repeated. (lin)
MUEP322,Recital Accompaniment, (1 to 2 Credits)| Practical experience preparing and performing recitals with various instruments/voices. Prerequisite MUMS 313, MUEP 311, 312, or permission of instructor. 2-hour maximum for MUEP 311, 312, 321, 322 per academic year. May be repeated. (lin)
MUEP356,Opera Workshop, (2 Credits)| Acting and improvisation for the singing actor. Includes basic stage movement and scene study. Offered each spring. Repetition encouraged. (lin)
MUEP357,Opera Mainstage, (2 Credits)| A fully staged opera music theater production. Offered each fall. Includes short tours and run out performances where appropriate. Auditioned in the previous spring. Prerequisite MUEP 356 (or consent of instructor). Repetition encouraged. (lin)
MUEP358,Jazz Combo, (1 Credit)| Trios, quartets, quintets, vocal or instrumental; emphasis on improvisation. May be repeated. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. (lin)
MUEP371,Chamber Music, (0 to 1 Credits)| Performance opportunities in a variety of traditional and non-traditional instrumental combinations and media. Attention is given to the preparation of selected works, with an emphasis on public performance. Any course may be repeated. (lin). (Section 1) 371-1. Strings. (Section 2) 371-2. Piano. (Section 3) 371-3. Winds. (Section 4) 371-4. Brass. (Section 5) 371-5. Percussion Ensemble. (Section 6) 371-6. Piano Ensemble. (Section 7) 371-7. Mixed Ensemble.
MUEP456,Advanced Scene Study, (1 Credit)| Advanced acting and improvisation for the singing actor. This course will guide students in the development and performance of advanced operatic repertoire. Meets requirement for one credit of chamber music. Prerequisites: MUEP 356 and 357 (lin)
MUIP101,Private Lessons: Piano, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP102,Private Lessons: Organ, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP103,Private Lessons: Harpsichord, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP104,Private Lessons: Voice, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP105,Private Lessons: Violin, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP106,Private Lessons: Viola, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP107,Private Lessons: Cello, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP108,Private Lessons: String Bass, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP109,Private Lessons: Trumpet, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP110,Private Lessons: Horn, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP111,Private Lessons: Trombone, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP112,Private Lessons: Euphonium, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP113,Private Lessons: Tuba, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP114,Private Lessons: Flute, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP115,Private Lessons: Clarinet, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP116,Private Lessons: Oboe, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP117,Private Lessons: Bassoon, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP118,Private Lessons: Saxophone, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP119,Private Lessons: Harp, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP120,Private Lessons: Percussion, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP121,Private Lessons: Guitar, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP122,Private Lessons: Jazz Guitar, (2 Credits)| For liberal arts students who are not music majors, or for music majors studying a secondary instrument in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP131,Small Group Piano Lessons, (1 Credit)| An introductory course for students without extensive formal piano study and those returning to piano study after an extended absence. Reading of music notation, terms, and symbols; basic keyboard theory, exploration of diverse repertory. Does not satisfy requirements of any music major. Consent of instructor required to insure proper placement. May be repeated for credit.
MUIP141,Small Group Voice Lessons, (1 Credit)| An introductory course for students without extensive vocal training. Reading of music notation, basics of tone production, song preparation and stage presence. Singers practice vocal exercises (warm ups), and learn assigned songs. May be repeated for credit.
MUIP201,Private Lessons: Piano, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP202,Private Lessons: Organ, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP203,Private Lessons: Harpsichord, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP204,Private Lessons: Voice, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP205,Private Lessons: Violin, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP206,Private Lessons: Viola, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP207,Private Lessons: Cello, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP208,Private Lessons: String Bass, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP209,Private Lessons: Trumpet, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP210,Private Lessons: French Horn, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP211,Private Lessons: Trombone, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP212,Private Lessons: Euphonium, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP213,Private Lessons: Tuba, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP214,Private Lessons: Flute, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP215,Private Lessons: Clarinet, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP216,Private Lessons: Oboe, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP217,Private Lessons: Bassoon, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP218,Private Lessons: Saxophone, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP219,Private Lessons: Harp, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP220,Private Lessons: Percussion, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP221,Private Lessons; Guitar, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP222,Private Lessons: Jazz Guitar, (2 to 4 Credits)| Private Lessons for music majors only, in the first four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP223,Class Piano I, (2 Credits)| Limited to music majors with minimal or no keyboard background needing to meet basic piano proficiency requirements.
MUIP224,Class Piano II, (2 Credits)| Continuation of Class Piano I. Prerequisite: MUIP 223 or proficiency.
MUIP225,Class Piano III, (2 Credits)| Continuation of Class Piano II. Prerequisite: MUIP 224 or proficiency.
MUIP226,Class Piano IV, (2 Credits)| Continuation of Class Piano III. Prerequisite: MUIP 225 or proficiency.
MUIP227,Class Piano V, (2 Credits)| Designed for music majors with previous background in piano who need assistance to meet basic piano requirements. Particular emphasis on technical development through study of scales, arpeggios, and chords; study of harmonization, reading, and performance also included. Prerequisite: MUIP 226 or proficiency.
MUIP232,Collaborative Vocal Coaching, (2 Credits)| Established teams of singers and pianists receive in-depth training in practice, rehearsal and performance techniques, with emphasis on style, interpretation and collaboration. May be repeated.
MUIP328,Organ Improvisation, (2 Credits)| Private organ lessons focusing on the art of classical improvisation. May be repeated.
MUIP394,Junior Recital, (0 Credits)| Presentation of a required degree recital as set forth in the Conservatory handbook. Required for the junior performance major. Graded pass/fail. Offered Fall and Spring with permission of instructor.
MUIP401,Private Lessons: Piano, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP402,Private Lessons: Organ, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP403,Private Lessons: Harpsichord, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP404,Private Lessons: Voice, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP405,Private Lessons: Violin, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP406,Private Lessons: Viola, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP407,Private Lessons: Cello, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP408,Private Lessons: String Bass, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP409,Private Lessons: Trumpet, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP410,Private Lessons: French Horn, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP411,Private Lessons: Trombone, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP412,Private Lessons: Euphonium, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP413,Private Lessons: Tuba, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP414,Private Lessons: Flute, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP415,Private Lessons: Clarinet, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP416,Private Lessons: Oboe, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP417,Private Lessons: Bassoon, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP418,Private Lessons: Saxophone, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP419,Private Lessons: Harp, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP420,Private Lessons: Percussion, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP421,Private Lessons: Guitar, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP422,Private Lessons: Jazz Guitar, (2 to 4 Credits)| For upper division music majors only, in the final four semesters of study in keyboard, voice, strings, or winds-percussion.
MUIP492,Half Senior Recital, (0 Credits)| Presentation of a required degree recital as set forth in the Conservatory handbook. Required for senior Music Education majors and Elective Studies majors. Graded pass/fail. Offered Fall and Spring with permission of instructor.
MUIP494,Full Senior Recital, (0 Credits)| Presentation of a required degree recital as set forth in the Conservatory handbook. Required for senior performance majors and composition majors. Graded pass/fail. Offered Fall and Spring with permission of instructor.
MUMS101,Music Performance Seminar, (1 Credit)| This course is designed for students desiring thematic core credit for private lessons or large ensemble membership. The seminar invites students to examine the meaning of musical expression by way of a personal experience of the disciplines, practices, and techniques of musical performance, and how such musical expression relates to the Christian faith. Corequisite: The course runs concurrently with either private lessons in a specific instrument or membership in a large ensemble, together meeting the requirements of the Visual and Performing Arts thematic core. Instructor permission required. Cannot be repeated. Offered each semester, B Quad. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAM.
MUMS114,Introduction to Music Studies, (1 Credit)| Proficiency-based instruction and study to improve eye/hand coordination of those students with rudimentary keyboard skills, with the goal of more efficient learning, maximization of practice time, and preparation for ensemble work.
MUMS115,Intro to Music Studies, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the study of music at the collegiate level, including foundational philosophical issues, the role of general education within professional music studies and fundamental approaches to the sub-disciplines within music. Offered Fall Semester only. (lin)
MUMS141,English & Italian Diction, (2 Credits)| The physiology of diction; introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet; study of Italian and English symbols and rules, interrelating diction and vocal technique; relationship of diction to dramatic and poetic elements of song texts. (lin)
MUMS243,Italian Grammar for Singers, (2 Credits)| Emphasis on basic Italian grammar and vocabulary required to read libretti and other song texts. May not be used to fulfill general education foreign language requirement. Prerequisite: MUMS 141. (lin)
MUMS245,French & German Diction, (2 Credits)| French and German diction using the International Phonetic Alphabet; continuing emphasis on accurate vowel production, articulation, and diction to develop uniformity, and artistic shaping of words and phrases; relationship of these to appropriate vocal literature. (lin)
MUMS248,Basic Conducting, (3 Credits)| The development of basic conducting skills and competencies necessary for conducting. Concurrent enrollment in MUMS 346 required. Prerequisite: MUTC 171 or consent of instructor. (lin)
MUMS255,Principles of Pedagogy I, (2 Credits)| Introduction to the philosophical and psychological foundation of teaching music; practical considerations in teaching private and group lessons. Offered fall semester only.
MUMS261,Feldenkrais for Musicians, (1 Credit)| An introduction to the Feldenkrais Method, using Awareness Through Movement lessons developed by Moshe Feldenkrais to encourage freedom of movement and efficient body alignment, and address non-productive movement patterns that interfere with the healthy execution of musical skills.
MUMS311,Choral Conducting, (3 Credits)| Development of advanced conducting skills with particular focus on conducting choral ensembles. Emphasis on development of rehearsal techniques and score study methods. Concurrent enrollment in MUMS 346 required. Prerequisite: MUMS 248. (lin)
MUMS312,Instrumental Conducting, (3 Credits)| Development of advanced conducting skills with particular focus on conducting instrumental ensembles: orchestra and band. Emphasis on development of rehearsal techniques and score study methods. Concurrent enrollment in MUMS 346 required. Prerequisite: MUMS 248. (lin)
MUMS313,Piano Accompaniment, (2 Credits)| Analysis and practice in the art of keyboard accompaniment, with attention to basic vocal and instrumental literature; sight reading, transposition, clefs, and score reading; matters of style and performance practices. By permission of instructor. Alternate years; offered fall in odd years. (lin)
MUMS321,Principles of Pedagogy II, (1 or 2 Credits)| (Section 1) 321-1. Piano. Learning basic principles of teaching piano through the study of selected beginning and intermediate teaching materials and developing a working knowledge of those materials. Prerequisite: Achievement of freshman piano major level. (Section 2) 321-2. Voice. Teaching methods from scientific, artistic, and psychological viewpoints; a study of vocal technique. (Section 3) 321-3. Strings. Survey and critique of teaching materials for the violin, viola, and cello, from Leopold Mozart to the present day. Prerequisite: completion of one year of private study, or permission of instructor. (Section 4) 321-4. Brass. Survey and critique of teaching materials for brass instruments in the form of a tutorial. Unique sections will be offered for trumpet, horn, and low brass. (Section 5) 321-5.Percussion. Survey and critique of teaching materials for percussion instruments. (Section 6) 321-6. Woodwinds. Survey and critique of teaching materials for woodwinds in the form of a tutorial. Unique sections will be offered for flute, singe reeds, and double reeds. (Section 7) 321-7. Guitar. Survey and critique of teaching materials for the guitar in the form of a tutorial. (lin)
MUMS332,African Music Education Seminar, (2 Credits)| Focuses on aspects of specific African musical cultures and their integration with history, geography, and general culture of the African peoples. Cross-cultural issues are highlighted. Provides appropriate background studies for music students intending to travel to Africa. Concurrent enrollment in MUMS 332L required.
MUMS332L,African Music Education Practicum, (1 Credit)| African Music Education Practicum. Provides opportunity for music students to experience African music and culture first hand. Students will be primarily involved in cross-cultural exchanges in school contexts: public schools, slum schools, private schools, Christian schools, missionary schools, rural and urban contexts. By permission of the instructor. Graded pass/fail. Concurrent enrollment in MUMS 332 required.
MUMS333,Music Outreach Practicum, (0 to 2 Credits)| Practical experience in music servant-leadership through teaching, directing, performing, or composing music to serve a specific constituency outside the Conservatory of Music. (lin)
MUMS341,Instrumental Techniques, (1 or 2 Credits)| Instruction in the instruments of the band and orchestra in preparation for teaching elementary and secondary instrumental music. Methods of tone production. Development of technical facility and understanding of pedagogical principles involved. 341-1 High Strings (1 credit, A quad); 341-2 Low Strings (1 credit, B quad); 341-3 Woodwind (2 credits, lin); 341-4 Brass (2 credits, lin); 341-5 Percussion (2 credits, lin); 341-6 Guitar (1 credit, lin). Fees vary.
MUMS342,Vocal Techniques, (1 Credit)| Techniques of vocal production, the function of the voice, and application of these concepts to choral singing; special emphasis on the training of young and maturing voices. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUMS343,Piano & Vocal Techniques for Composers, (2 Credits)| A detailed study of piano and vocal writing, with special emphasis on practical applications through compositional projects. Primary focuses include performance techniques, poetry and text setting, notation, and development of the student's singing voice. Prerequisite: MUTC 122 or consent of instructor. Alternate years; offered fall in even years. (lin)
MUMS344,Percussion Techniques for Composers, (2 Credits)| A survey of percussion instruments and basic performance techniques, notation issues, and percussion literature, with special emphasis on practical applications through compositional projects. Prerequisite: MUTC 122 or consent of instructor. Alternate years; offered fall in odd years. (lin)
MUMS346,Conducting Lab, (0 Credits)| Provides students a music ensemble with which to practice their conducting skills with comments from the instructors. Required of students enrolled in Basic Conducting (MUMS 248), Choral Conducting, (MUMS 311) or Instrumental Conducting (MUMS 312). Graded pass/fail. (lin)
MUMS349,Organ Service Playing Techniques and Teaching, (3 Credits)| Musicianship for the church organist. Hymn-playing, accompanying, improvisation, conducting from the console, playing various liturgical and non-liturgical services, teaching organ. Required of Bachelor of Music organ majors; open to others by permission of instructor. Alternate years; offered fall in even years. (lin)
MUMS355,Group Pedagogy, (3 Credits)| Adaptation of music methods and materials for age-specific and instrument-specific group classes of music students. Group dynamics and management techniques are explored. Prerequisites: MUMS 255 or by approval. Alternate years; offered spring in odd years (lin)
MUMS356,Studio Administration, (2 Credits)| Organization, facilities and business procedures for setting up a private music studio; strategies for promotion, recruitment, and retention of students, portfolio development, personal ethics and professional growth. Prerequisite: MUMS 255 or by approval. Alternate years; offered spring in even years.
MUMS372,Principles of Pedagogy: Suzuki I, (2 Credits)| A study and application of the philosophies of teaching and playing the violin/viola using the Suzuki Method in its foundational level (this satisfies Suzuki Association of America's level 1A). Suzuki Literature Book One will be memorized, performed, and analyzed for teaching points. Alternate years; offered fall in even years. (lin)
MUMS373,Principles of Pedagogy: Suzuki II, (2 Credits)| A study of violin and viola pedagogy and related topics building on the foundation of Pedagogy I (MUMS 372), a prerequisite. Suzuki Literature Book Two will be memorized, performed, and analyzed for teaching points. Alternate years; offered spring in odd years. Prerequisite: MUMS 372. (lin)
MUMS385,Applied Pedagogy I, (2 Credits)| The culmination of the pedagogy track in which students will be mentored by an experienced teacher in an internship relationship. Students will be responsible for teaching other non-college-age students, observing their mentor-teacher, and consulting weekly. Prerequisites: MUMS 255 and MUMS 321 or 372. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUMS411,Music In Special Education, (2 Credits)| Addresses the instructional needs and characteristics of students with disabilities that are in today’s classrooms; an overview of the legal basis for special education students in the classroom; aspects of writing special education lesson plans and Individualized Educational Plans (IEP); and the multidisciplinary approach to teaching in special education. Alternate years; offered spring in even years.
MUMS421,Honors Conducting, (0 to 1 Credits)| For students who demonstrate a superior skill in conducting; by permission of choral or instrumental large ensemble director. Study, rehearse, and conduct music under supervision of large ensemble director. By permission of the instructor. Prerequisites: MUMS 311 or 312.
MUMS455,Applied Pedagogy II, (2 Credits)| A continuation and extension of Applied Pedagogy I. Prerequisites: MUMS 255, 321, 385. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUMS471,Choral Methods, (2 Credits)| Organization of instruction in choral music for the junior and senior high school. Methods of tone production and development; classification and placement of singers; style, interpretation, balance, blend, rehearsal procedures, and ensemble management. Concurrent enrollment in MUMS 471L required. (lin)
MUMS471L,Choral Methods Practicum, (1 Credit)| A teacher-aiding experience in a local school during the semester. Concurrent with MUMS 471. Graded pass/fail. (lin)
MUMS472,Instrumental Methods, (2 Credits)| Organization of instruction in school instrumental music. Recruitment and teaching techniques, administrative responsibilities, and instructional materials for orchestra, concert and marching bands, and jazz band. Concurrent enrollment in MUMS 472L required. (lin)
MUMS472L,Instrumental Methods Practicum, (1 Credit)| A teacher-aiding experience in a local school during the semester. Concurrent with MUMS 472. Graded pass/fail. (lin)
MUMS473,Elementary School Music, (2 Credits)| Methods and materials for teaching general music from kindergarten through middle school. Integration of Orff, Kodaly, and Dalcroze concepts and techniques. Skills in recorder playing and Orff instruments. Study of curriculum, lesson planning, and evaluation. Concurrent enrollment in MUMS 473L required. Prerequisites: MUTC 171, MUCS 101 or equivalent. (lin)
MUMS473L,Elementary School Music Practicum, (1 Credit)| A teaching experience in a local school during the semester. Concurrent with MUMS 473. Graded pass/fail. (lin)
MUMS485,Opera Mainstage Honors Directing, (2 Credits)| Assistant directing and/or production management for Opera Mainstage (MUEP 357) or scene directing for Opera Worshop (MUEP 356). Offered each semester, by consent of instructor. Meets one semester of large ensemble credit. Repetition encouraged. (lin)
MUMS495,Directed Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Directed Study. (Fees vary) (lin)
MUMS496,Internship, (2 to 4 Credits)| Prerequisites: Junior classification and permission of the Conservatory Director of Music Education. Elective Studies majors must have completed 18 hours of their elective concentration. Graded pass/fail. May be repeated. (lin)
MUTC101,Introduction to Music: Reading Writing and Analysis, (2 Credits)| This course introduces students to fundamental concepts such as notation, rhythm, meter, timbre, pitch, scales, keys, intervals, and chords. This is achieved through the formal study of music theory; critical listening (including non-Western, popular, folk, and Western classical genres); engaging reading about faith, culture and race as it relates to music; and music composition. In this course, the student will learn listening strategies, methods of musical criticism, the nature and significance of personal creativity, the various roles that music can play in the life of the individual Christian, the church and culture. NOTE: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of VPAM.
MUTC111,Music Notation, (2 Credits)| Introduction to the principles of traditional music notation. Participants are taught to notate music accurately and neatly both by hand and using Finale notation software. Prerequisite: The ability to read music. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC122,Introduction to Composition, (2 Credits)| Examination of fundamental practical, spiritual, and philosophical issues relating to music composition. Participants study the basic elements of compositional craftsmanship, including pitch and rhythmic organization, melodic construction, harmonic progression, texture, developmental techniques, formal organization, instrumentation, and notation. Additional topics include the nature and significance of personal creativity, the functions of music in society and the church, measures of artistic quality, musical meaning, musical style, the creative process, and composition as a career. Participants will complete a number of short composition exercises, followed by a complete composition of moderate length. Prerequisite: MUTC 111 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUTC151,Music Theory I, (3 Credits)| Diatonic harmony in repertoire from the Common Practice Period. Topics include intervals, species counterpoint, diatonic triads, diatonic seventh chords, harmonic analysis, voice leading, and non-chord tones. Prerequisite: Passing grade on music fundamentals exam, grade of C or higher in MUTC 101, or consent of instructor. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC152,Aural Skills I, (1 Credit)| Development of analytical listening abilities and practical musicianship skills. Emphases include treble- and bass-clef sight-singing, rhythm recitation, basic conducting, meter identification, scale identification, instrument identification, rhythmic dictation, and melodic dictation using diatonic excerpts in conventional meters. Prerequisite: Passing grade on music fundamentals exam, grade of C or higher in MUTC 101, or consent of instructor. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC171,Music Theory II, (3 Credits)| Chromatic harmony in repertoire from the Common Practice Period. Topics include secondary-function chords, tonicizations, modulations, modal mixture, Neapolitan chords, augmented sixth chords, and enharmonicism. Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 151 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUTC172,Aural Skills II, (1 Credit)| Continued development of analytical listening abilities and practical musicianship skills. Emphases include treble-, bass-, and alto-clef sight-singing, rhythm recitation, rhythmic dictation, and melodic dictation using diatonic excerpts in conventional meters. Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 152. (lin)
MUTC231,Composition I, (2 Credits)| Continued emphasis on the basic elements of compositional craftsmanship, including pitch and rhythmic organization, melodic construction, harmonic progression, texture, developmental techniques, formal organization, instrumentation, and notation. Participants will complete a number of short composition exercises, followed by a complete composition of moderate length. Prerequisite: MUTC 122 or consent of instructor. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC232,Composition II, (2 Credits)| Continued emphasis on the basic elements of compositional craftsmanship, including pitch and rhythmic organization, melodic construction, harmonic progression, texture, developmental techniques, formal organization, instrumentation, and notation. Assignments are related to the interests and needs of the individual student. Prerequisite: MUTC 231 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUTC233,Digital Music Technology I, (2 Credits)| Exploration of the Digital Audio Workstation, including MIDI sequencing, audio recording, sampling, and sound design. Emphasis is placed on using technology in a musical way. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC241,Music Theory III, (2 Credits)| Large-scale form in repertoire from the Common Practice Period. Topics include phrase structure, binary forms, ternary forms, variation forms, rondo forms, sonata forms, vocal forms, and fugues. Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 171 or consent of instructor. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC251,Music Theory III, (3 Credits)| (for catalogs before 2011) Provides a detailed examination of musical vocabularies of the late 19th century to the present. Extensions of tonality, new developments in rhythm, atonality and serialism, set theory, notational innovations, assumptions and practices of the avant-garde. (lin)
MUTC252,Aural Skills III, (1 Credit)| Continued development of analytical listening abilities and practical musicianship skills. Emphases include treble-, bass-, alto-, and tenor-clef sight-singing, rhythm recitation, rhythmic dictation, melodic dictation, harmonic dictation, and formal analysis using lightly chromatic excerpts in conventional meters. Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 172 or consent of instructor. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC261,Music Theory IV, (3 Credits)| Analysis of twentieth-century and contemporary music. Topics include impressionism, atonality, pitch-class set theory, serialism, and indeterminacy, as well as various developments in rhythm, melody, harmony, timbre, texture, form, and notation. Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 171 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUTC272,Aural Skills IV, (1 Credit)| Continued development of analytical listening abilities and practical musicianship skills. Emphases include treble-, bass-, alto-, and tenor-clef sight-singing, rhythm recitation, rhythmic dictation, melodic dictation, harmonic dictation, and formal analysis using highly chromatic and modulating excerpts in conventional meters. Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 252 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUTC331,Intermediate Composition, (2 Credits)| Private 60-minute composition lessons. Assignments are related to the interests and needs of the individual student, and students are expected to spend a minimum of 6 hours per week on composition. Prerequisite: MUTC 232 or consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. (lin)
MUTC333,Digital Music Technology II, (2 Credits)| Continued exploration of the Digital Audio Workstation with a focus on ways of creatively using technology for original electro-acoustic composition. Prerequisite: MUTC 233 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUTC343,Jazz Theory, (2 Credits)| Practical studies of extended chords, voicings, progressions, melodic and rhythmic development, and formal structures, with application to composition and improvisation in jazz styles. Prerequisite: MUTC 171 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only.
MUTC352,Aural Skills V, (1 Credit)| Continued development of analytical listening abilities and practical musicianship skills. Emphases include treble-, bass-, alto-, and tenor-clef sight-singing, rhythm recitation, meter identification, scale identification, and melodic dictation using highly chromatic, modal, and atonal excerpts in both conventional and irregular meters. Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 272 or consent of instructor. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC353,Modal Counterpoint, (2 Credits)| Analysis and composition in the sixteenth-century contrapuntal style. Prereq: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 241 or consent of instructor. Alternate years; offered spring in odd years. (lin)
MUTC354,Tonal Counterpoint, (2 Credits)| Analysis and composition in the eighteenth-century contrapuntal style. Prereq: Minimum grade of C in MUTC 241 or consent of instructor. Alternate years; offered spring in even years. (lin)
MUTC355,Orchestration, (2 Credits)| A study of instrumentation, orchestration, and score analysis, including scoring and transcribing for various large and small ensembles. Prerequisite: MUTC 171 or consent of instructor. Offered fall semester only. (lin)
MUTC356,Arranging, (2 Credits)| Melodic and textural variation, harmonic substitution, and modulatory techniques, with exercises in a variety of styles and genres. Alternate years; offered spring in odd years. Prerequisite: MUTC 171 or consent of instructor. (lin)
MUTC364,The Improvising Musician, (2 Credits)| A practical introduction to improvisational techniques in a variety of styles and genres, including an exploration of the theological, psychological, and musical foundations of improvisation. Prerequisite: MUTC 171 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only. (lin)
MUTC389,Special Topics in Music Theory, (2 Credits)| Exploration of an advanced music theory or analysis topic. Subjects change on a yearly basis. Prerequisite: MUTC 171 or consent of instructor. Offered spring semester only.
MUTC451,Advanced Composition, (3 Credits)| Private 60-minute composition lessons. Assignments are related to the interests and needs of the individual student, and students are expected to spend a minimum of 9 hours per week on composition. Prerequisite: Two semesters of MUTC 331 or consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. (lin)
MUTC495,Directed Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Independent study in music theory, aural skills, composition, or a related field. (Fees vary) (lin)
NEUR241,Foundations of Neuroscience, (4 Credits)| This course is an overview of the basic structure and function of the nervous system. Emphasis is placed on divisions of the nervous system, neural development, cellular and molecular systems and neurophysiology. Two lectures, three hours laboratory. Lab fee.
NEUR369,Neuroscience Collaborative Research, (2 Credits)| A junior/senior level course where students would participate in laboratory research under the direction of a faculty advisor. Prerequisite: Either PSYC 269, BIOL 252, AHS 271 or consent of instructor.
NEUR494,Neuroscience Capstone, (2 Credits)| A junior/senior level course with an interdisciplinary research component is developed as the culmination of the minor. Students will develop a research study using tools from multiple disciplines to answer a question related to the field of neuroscience. Prerequisite NEUR 369.
PACS101,Introduction to Peace and Conflict Studies, (4 Credits)| This course will explore the fact of violence and the biblical imperative for peace. This survey course will identify causes and conditions that contribute to violence; mechanisms for dealing with violence; and strategies for building peace. Multiple disciplinary lenses and methodological approaches will be examined in these endeavors.
PACS494,Senior Seminar in Peace and Conflict Studies: Peace Reconciliation and Justice, (2 Credits)| This two-hour course will explore the prospects for peace and reconciliation given the fact of violence. The course will consider various ideals of justice, various methods of peacebuilding, and limitations associated with methods and movements for peace, reconciliation, and justice. The extent and efficacy of religion and religionists in peace, reconciliation and justice efforts will be considered, as well secular humanist approaches to peace, reconciliation and justice. Since students from the Community Transformation concentration and from the Global Justice concentration will coalesce in this course, students will debate the strengths and weaknesses of various units of analysis and of various disciplinary and methodological approaches to conflict resolution and peace building.
PACS496,Internship, (4 Credits)| Allow students with opportunities to apply theoretical and theological knowledge by engaging in strategic peacebuilding, conflict resolution and conflict management in a variety of contexts to organizations. In addition, internships provide valuable insight into careers related to peace building and conflict management. Exploration of faith and vocation is a crucial component.
PHIL101,Introduction to Philosophy, (4 Credits)| Most college age students have heard the names of Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Descartes, Kant, and Nietzsche, among many other famous philosophers. This first course in philosophy introduces students to the nature of philosophy, some of its major figures, and some of philosophy's central areas of concern, especially those of metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics. Students learn about philosophical method and argument, and how to articulate and defend their own philosophical judgments.
PHIL103,Philosophy and Scientific Inquiry, (4 Credits)| What can philosophy contribute to the sciences and the sciences to philosophy? This course explores the interplay between these two disciplines. We approach these questions through the lens of the history of philosophy as it interacts with the emergence of the sciences as a distinctive form of inquiry. Each arises from the common human impulse to offer an account of the world of experience. The development of philosophy reveals a dynamic synergy between these disciplines, one that bears upon the substance of the claims forwarded by each. Exploring this synergy reveals a common strategy for discerning the underlying, often hidden, nature of the world in which we live. This shared approach to inquiry produces a unified project of trying to explain the whole of reality.
PHIL105,Race & Justice, (4 Credits)| An introduction to philosophy and racial diversity in the United States, focusing on justice and African Americans. Topics include conceptions of justice, what it is like to be part of a minority race, racism, affirmative action, ethical theory, and the concept of race.
PHIL205,Ethics & Society, (4 Credits)| How do I know if an action is right or wrong, and how can I explain my judgment to others and defend it against criticisms? What is my role as a Christian citizen in seeking to influence my society about moral matters of importance to all? What is the common good and how do we promote it? How should we understand the controversial issues of sexuality, property, economic and gender justice, legislating morality, capital punishment, drugs, euthanasia, abortion, the needy, and the environment? How should our nation deal ethically with other nations and their citizens? This course will engage students in critical thinking about important issues in the application of ethics to social issues.
PHIL206,Philosophy and Spiritual Formation, (4 Credits)| An introduction to philosophical, anthroplogical, and sociological topics relevant to spiritual formation. All Christians are faced with a perennial set of questions related to their development as citizens of God's kingdom. This course aims to provide the resources (both philosophical and social scientific) to help students begin developing answers to questions pertaining to becoming a virtuous person, living the good life, forming an identity, belonging to a community, maintaining Christian beliefs, and determining what practices are appropriate manifestations of such beliefs.
PHIL215,Contemporary Moral Problems, (4 Credits)| Explores contemporary moral questions, including: How do we know when a course of action is right or wrong? Is it ever morally permissible to lie, or steal, or kill? What rights do people have? Is it unjust to treat persons differently on the basis of their sex or race? Are there ethical objections to certain sorts of sexual behavior? What answers can be given to questions surrounding capital punishment, AIDS, drugs, euthanasia, abortion, the needy, and the environment? These are a few of the pressing moral questions faced by reflective people considering the nature of human life in society. In this course, we will address such questions from the perspective of moral philosophy, or ethics.
PHIL216,Philosophy of The Arts, (2 Credits)| Examines philosophical issues in the arts, such as the nature of creativity, the categories of “art” versus “non-art” and “high” versus “low” art, the responsibility of the artist to the community, the role of art in society, and the relationships between art and religion.
PHIL217,Philosophy of Art, (4 Credits)| This course provides an introduction to some of the core questions in the philosophy of art. Questions covered include: What counts as art? How do we decide which cultural objects are, and are not artworks? Why should we care about art? Does art have the capacity to reveal non-trivial truths about the world? And, are different art forms valuable for different reasons? In addition to these more traditional questions, we will spend the last few weeks of the semester considering what attitude - if any -Christianity encourages toward art. In the process of asking these questions, the course will require that students engage substantively with a number of different art forms, including music, painting, and theater. Note: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of visual arts.
PHIL222,Souls & Brains, (4 Credits)| Given what we now know about the brain thanks to advances in neuroscience, should we still believe in souls? How should contemporary research on the brain inform our thinking about consciousness, the emotions, freedom, morality, religious experiences, the afterlife, and thinking itself? This introductory philosophy course explores these questions and others like them, guided both by classic philosophical readings and by contributions from various biological and psychological subfields.
PHIL226,Asian Philosophy, (2 Credits)| Philosophical traditions in the East have developed simultaneously with those in the West, albeit until recently with little demonstrable influence on one another. Philosophical systems arising within Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism represent fascinating alternatives to those associated with the Hellenic, Roman, and Christian worlds. In this course we will study philosophies of the East, paying close attention to their roots in the corresponding religious systems of Asia and their ongoing relationship to those traditions. We will view them in the comparative light of both Western philosophical thought and the Hebrew-Christian religious tradition. Legacy diversity designation.
PHIL227,Asian Philosophy, (4 Credits)| Philosophical systems arising within Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism represent fascinating alternatives to those associated with the Hellenic, Roman, and Christian worlds. This course will involve substantive engagement with the primary philosophies of the East, paying close attention to their roots in the corresponding religious systems of Asia and their ongoing relationship to those traditions. In the spirit of all truth is God's truth, we will view them in the comparative light of both Western philosophical thought and the Hebrew-Christian religious tradition.
PHIL241,Suffering, (4 Credits)| If God were good, He would wish to make His creatures perfectly happy, and if God were almighty, He would be able to do what He wished. But the creatures are not happy. Therefore God lacks either goodness, or power, or both. That, C.S. Lewis writes, is the problem of pain, in its simplest form. This course addresses that problem, using Lewis' Problem of Pain as our stepping off point and then enriching our theological and philosophical horizons through readings from, e.g., Rudolph Otto, J. L. Mackie, Alvin Plantinga, Roderick Chisholm, William Rowe, and Marilyn McCord Adams.
PHIL243,Intro To Logic, (2 Credits)| This course teaches students to identify, analyze, and assess the sorts of arguments one encounters in philosophical texts and in everyday life, such as op-ed pieces, policy papers, and political writing. The course places special emphasis on constructing and refining arguments in order to draw appropriate conclusions in support of one’s own beliefs. Classical syllogistic arguments and other formal argument structures receive attention, as do the common fallacies of reasoning. This is an excellent course to enhance your critical thinking and writing abilities.
PHIL244,Symbolic Logic, (2 Credits)| This sequel to PHIL 243 focuses on the form or structure of valid deductive arguments, and the simple and compound sentences that form them. It analyzes the rules of deductive inference, replacement rules, and how to translate ordinary English sentences into their symbolic equivalent. Proving the validity or invalidity of arguments in Sentential Logic, Predicate Logic, and Quantified Predicate Logic comprises a major portion of the course. Like math courses, this class has problems and proofs that students will work through in class and as homework. Prerequisite: PHIL 243 or permission of instructor.
PHIL245,Logic, (4 Credits)| An introduction to both informal and formal logic, with attention to developing the skills necessary for describing and analyzing the phenomena and information and ideas students will invariably confront. The course seeks to develop a keen number sense along with the mathematical skills of analysis in concert with critical reading and writing. Direct application is made to both philosophical and theological areas of inquiry. (Students registering for PHIL 243 will take the first quad of this course).
PHIL247,Philosophic Topics with Contemporary Relevance, (2 Credits)| A study of a contemporary topic or issue in philosophy. Suitable for non-majors. (This course does not fulfill the PI tag.) Topics include: Death and the Meaning of Life, Emotions, Religious Experience, Love & Friendship, Philosophy of Gender.
PHIL248,Philosophic Topics with Contemporary Relevance, (4 Credits)| A study of a contemporary topic or issue in philosophy. Suitable for non-majors. (This course does not fulfill the PI tag.) Topics include: Love & Friendship, Philosophy of Gender, Philosophy & Film.
PHIL251,Global Justice, (4 Credits)| People around the world suffer hunger, oppression, from poor health, and many other causes. Is this merely misfortune or is it injustice? We will consider the main issues of global justice, such as whether one can speak of justice in a global context rather than simply within societies, the role of international human rights, the proper response to global economic inequalities, the morality of international conflict, and international environmental justice. Legacy diversity designation.
PHIL255,Existentialism, (4 Credits)| This course provides an introduction to existentialism through the writings of thinkers like Soren Kierkegaard, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Friedrich Nietzsche, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Albert Camus. In keeping with the movement itself, this course is heavily interdisciplinary, including both literary and philosophical texts, and thinkers from both the Christian and the atheistic intellectual traditions. Topics covered include: the nature of human freedom and creativity, the relation of religion to morality, and the meaning of existence.
PHIL281,Philosophy & Postmodernity, (2 Credits)| People often think there is something called “postmodernism.” There isn’t. Instead, there are various postmodern thinkers, some of whom turn out to be people with a deep Christian faith. In this course, we read some of the (in)famous figures, such as Jacques Derrida and Richard Rorty. But we will also read the Jewish thinker Emmanuel Levinas and Jean-Luc Marion and Jean-Louis Chrétien, who are deeply Christian in their thinking and have radically changed the philosophical landscape. Prerequisite: PI course
PHIL311,History of Philosophy: Ancient & Medieval, (4 Credits)| Ancient and medieval philosophers often worked to cultivate a deep sense of gratitude for that which they had inherited and out of which they built, while also being creative thinkers in their own rights. This course looks at a few of the major thinkers and texts from the nearly 2000 year period stretching from the beginnings of Western philosophy in 585 BC to the opening years of the European Renaissance. It traces common problems and themes that receive ongoing attention throughout this period, such as: the problems of the one and the many, the nature of the cosmos, the existence of God, the relationship between faith and reason, the problem of universals, the nature of the soul, and others. Prerequisite: PI course or permission of instructor.
PHIL312,History of Philosophy: Modern & Contemporary, (4 Credits)| This course, like PHIL 311, is dedicated to an overview of Western philosophy. In this semester, we look at modern and contemporary philosophy, beginning with the Renaissance rejection of scholasticism, moving through 17th and 18th century rationalists and empiricist, the Kantian synthesis, 19th century responses to Kant, and several major 20th century schools, including phenomenology, logical positivism, analytic philosophy, and pragmatism. Prerequisite: PI course or permission of instructor.
PHIL315,Philosophy of Religion, (4 Credits)| Is there a God, and if so, what is he like? Can God’s existence be established by philosophical argument? These are among Western philosophy’s oldest questions. The philosophy of religion course explores philosophical concerns arising out of theism in general and Christian theism in particular. Topics include: the reasonableness of belief in God, God’s nature, the problem of suffering, the problem of divine foreknowledge and human freedom, religious experience, religious pluralism, and more. Course readings touch mainly on contemporary authors, though students also read many historically important figures.
PHIL317,Biomedical Ethics, (2 Credits)| An interdisciplinary consideration of ethical issues in the biological and health sciences with an emphasis on those related to medicine, including issues in biotechnology, such as genetic engineering, end of life issues, abortion, human experimentation, and the role of race and gender in medical treatment and research. Prerequisites: PI course or PHIL 215, and 4 hr lab course in the legacy Studies in Nature cluster or a CATC SP course. Legacy diversity designation.
PHIL318,Philosophy of Law, (2 Credits)| What is law? What separates law from mere orders backed by threats? Ought judges to “make” law, or only to interpret it? Is punishment justified, and if so, for what purpose? When should people be held responsible for their actions? What rights should defendants have? What goals of justice should the law serve? Are ordinary moral obligations suspended for the lawyer in performance of his or her duties? These are a few of the questions arising out of the attempt to understand the nature and role of law and legal systems in society.
PHIL319,Political Philosophy, (2 Credits)| Examines some of the major issues and concepts in political philosophy, including political authority, freedom and coercion, civil disobedience, and justice, as construed in the liberal, Marxist, communitarian, and feminist traditions.
PHIL328,Business Ethics, (2 Credits)| Corporations and the economy in the US and elsewhere are reeling from the effects of an unprecedented series of moral scandals. What ethical guidelines must be put in place to reestablish confidence in the integrity of business? Some of the questions are: is it ethical to pay bribes in foreign countries, or to go along with their treatment of people when those ways are seen as unjust in our society? What are the ethical obligations of truth telling in the context of business negotiations or advertising? What rights do employees have, and how can businesses best respect these rights? What is the proper place of capitalistic institutions in a just society? What is 'fair treatment' for women and minorities in business? In this course, we will have a brief survey of basic ethical concepts and general moral theory, and then discuss a variety of ethical issues that arise in the areas of business and work. The general orientation will be towards an integration of the theoretical with the practical. Taught jointly with the Business Economics Department.
PHIL331,Science & Christian Belief, (4 Credits)| This course looks at the nature of scientific reasoning, and how philosophers of science answer questions of knowledge and reality, with specific interest in the post-positivist, post-modern critiques of scientific presumption to knowledge. Special attention is devoted to the sometimes-troubled relationship between science and Christian belief, as these arise from contemporary accounts of the origins of the cosmos and evolutionary theory. This is an excellent course for science majors and philosophy double majors, though it does not presume any specific knowledge or even competency in the sciences. Prerequisite: PI course.
PHIL341,Nature Of Persons, (4 Credits)| Starting with P.F. Strawson’s seminal work on the reactive attitudes, this course explores what it means to be a created person by working through various interpretations and crucial questions concerning our reactive attitudes (e.g., Is distinctively human life possible without these attitudes? Should we quench our retributive attitudes?), which prompts us to follow Harry Frankfurt in posing questions about the structure of created personhood, and then leads us to conclude the course with questions from Charles Taylor and Richard Rorty about the world of persons. Additional readings from, e.g., Gary Watson, Nietzsche, Rawls, Dennett, and Camus.
PHIL345,Classical and Medieval Political Thought, (4 Credits)| See PSCI 365.
PHIL346,Modern Political Thought, (4 Credits)| See PSCI 366.
PHIL347,Topics in Philosophy, (2 Credits)| A study of a contemporary philosopher or philosophical development of cross-disciplinary importance. Suitable for non-majors who have already taken a PI course. Topics include: Feminist Theory, Religious Epistemology, Language and Thought.
PHIL348,Topics in Philosophy, (4 Credits)| A study of a contemporary philosopher or philosophical development of cross-disciplinary importance. Suitable for non-majors who have already taken a PI course. Topics include: Feminist Theory, Religious Epistemology, Language and Thought.
PHIL349,Christian Political Thought, (4 Credits)| See PSCI 349.
PHIL447,Advanced Topics in Philosophy, (2 Credits)| A study of the debates and discussion in a significant area of contemporary philosophy. Suitable for philosophy majors or those having taken at least one semester of the history of philosophy (PHIL 311, 312). Topics include: Virtue Ethics, Philosophy of Mind, Free Will/Determinism, Contemporary Ethics. Prerequisite: PHIL 311 or 312.
PHIL448,Advanced Topics in Philosophy, (4 Credits)| A study of the debates and discussion in a significant area of contemporary philosophy. Suitable for philosophy majors or those having taken at least one semester of the history of philosophy Prerequisite: PHIL 311 or 312. Topics include: 448-1. (Section 1) Epistemology. Surely, among the most distinctive features of humans are their cognitive powers and the knowledge they make possible: historical, empirical, apriori, interpersonal, moral, and religious knowledge, among others. Epistemology, or the theory of knowledge, explores knowledge and related intellectual goods such as understanding, rationality, and experiential acquaintance. It investigates human intellectual powers, the extent of their reach, and whether these powers must follow a particular method or be trained to certain intellectual habits to be used to greatest effect. Typical questions asked by epistemologists include: What are the nature and limits of human knowledge? What conditions must we satisfy in order to know or to have justified belief? What intellectual virtues characterize excellent intellectual agents? Do the arguments of skeptics show that we don’t have knowledge or justified belief? While this course focuses on more contemporary discussions, we will also discuss the epistemologies of many historically significant philosophers; 448-2. (Section 2) Contemporary Metaphysics. This course takes a careful look at a number of pressing (and enduring) philosophical issues. We begin with the methodological question of realism and truth: Can we in fact discern the hidden nature of reality? If so, how? We then look at various proposals as to the nature of persons, including questions of mind and body, free will and determinism, and personal identity. In addition to a fairly comprehensive survey of such topics as these, we will spend some weeks near the end of the semester looking at book-length treatment by a contemporary philosopher focusing in one or the other of these areas.; 448-3 (Section 3) Ethical Theory The nature of ethical theory is a vigorously contested issue in philosophy today, and one that has very significant practical implications for society. What is the status of the moral principles of the Hebrew-Christian moral tradition? Can they be defended and argued on the basis of reason and common human experience, or are they only “house rules” for those particular communities that have religious allegiances? Can we still talk today of a “common morality”, accessible in principle to all people in society, that can be the basis of law and policy? Should ethical reflection be conducted in terms of action guiding precepts or ideals of moral character? Are questions of right and wrong capable of being decided on rational grounds? How, if at all, can rival moral judgments be established as true over competitors? How are moral principles to be applied in concrete situations? Such questions are but a few of those that arise in moral philosophy, questions that have occupied a great part of the energies of the West’s leading philosophers since Socrates. This course is an advanced undergraduate seminar course in ethical theory.
PHIL454,Historical Seminar, (2 Credits)| Explores the writings of key historical figures from the following four periods in the history of philosophy: ancient, medieval, modern, and 19th century or contemporary philosophy. Each semester offers a different historical seminar, with all four periods being offered on a regular rotation. Prerequisite: PHIL 311 or 312.
PHIL455,Historical Seminar, (4 Credits)| Explores the writings of key historical figures from the following four periods in the history of philosophy: ancient, medieval, modern, and 19th century or contemporary philosophy. Each semester offers a different historical seminar, with all four periods being offered on a regular rotation. Prerequisite: PHIL 311 or 312.
PHIL456,German Historical Seminar, (2 Credits)| Explores the writings of key German historical philosophers. Requires reading texts in German, although discussion and papers may be done in English. Common topics include: Kant, Hegel, Nietzsche, Heidegger's Being and Time, and Gadamer's hermeneutics. Prerequisite: PHIL 311 or PHIL 312. See PHIL 454.
PHIL457,German Historical Seminar, (4 Credits)| Explores the writings of key German historical philosophers. Requires reading texts in German, although discussion and papers may be done in English. Prerequisite: PHIL 311 or PHIL 312. See PHIL 455.
PHIL494,Philosophy Capstone: Revisiting the Good Life, (2 Credits)| In this course philosophy majors in their final year at Wheaton revisit questions concerning the good life that they initially encountered in their First Year Seminar, informed now by their studies in the liberal arts, and especially by their training as philosophers. Questions concerning human well-being or the highest human good have been perennial philosophical concerns, and students in this course with interact with voices in the historical and contemporary debates among philosophers on these issues. They will also explore the ways other disciplines approach the same issues, reading (for instance) literary works and psychological studies. The goal will be to better understand the way their training in philosophy bears upon other aspects of their liberal arts studies at Wheaton, their spiritual growth and development, and their vocations as scholars, workers, and Christians. Prerequisites: PHIL 311/PHIL 312, must be in last year at Wheaton.
PHIL495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Guided reading and research for the advanced student.
PHIL496,Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| Independent study on philosophical issues related to internship or employment experience. Requires department approval of student's proposal. Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with Philosophy major.
PHIL497,Independent Study in German Philosophy, (1 to 4 Credits)| Guided reading and research of German philosophical texts for the advanced student. Prerequisite: PHIL 311 or 312.
PHIL499,Honors Thesis, (4 Credits)| An independent philosophical project requiring original research and/or argumentation, developed in a scholarly paper and culminating in an oral examination. By application only.
PHYS221,General Physics I, (4 Credits)| Newtonian mechanics, energy, waves and heat. Non-calculus based. Four hours lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: Pre-calculus (algebra and trigonometry) competence. Not open to students with prior credit for PHYS 231 or 233.
PHYS222,General Physics II, (4 Credits)| Electromagnetism, optics, and modern physics. Non-calculus based. Four hours lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 221. Not open to students with prior credit for PHYS 232 or 234.
PHYS231,Introductory Physics I, (4 Credits)| Kinematics, Newtonian dynamics, conservation laws, and selected topics from oscillations, waves, fluids, and thermodynamics. Four hours lecture, three hours laboratory. Co or Prerequisite: MATH 231.
PHYS232,Introductory Physics II, (4 Credits)| Electricity and magnetism, optics, and selected topics from modern physics, waves, and thermodynamics. Four hours lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 231. Co or Prerequisite: MATH 232
PHYS294,Physics for the Future, (2 Credits)| The beginning of an exciting journey into the intricacies of our created world. Includes discussion of recent physics breakthroughs, exposure to research at Wheaton and at nearby national laboratories, discussion of vocational pathways, and thoughts on the relationship of physics to the liberal arts and the Christian faith. (lin)
PHYS305,Dakota Skies: Astronomy and Atmospheric Science in the Black Hills, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the study of the weather and the universe. Topics include physical foundations for astronomy and atmospheric science, the evolution of stars, the structure and origin of the universe, the structure of the earth's atmosphere, weather systems, weather analysis and forecasting. Special attention will be given to sound scientific practices, including systematic scientific investigations, critical evaluation of scientific claims and the ability to develop a sound scientific argument.
PHYS311,Introduction to Medical Physics, (2 Credits)| A survey of radiation therapy, nuclear medicine, diagnostic imaging, and health physics with discussion on ethical and stewardship concerns of these technologies. Prerequisites: PHYS 222 or 232.
PHYS331,Spacetime & Quanta, (4 Credits)| Special Relativity, Quantum Mechanics, and selected topics from Atomic Physics, Statistical Physics, Nuclear Physics, Particle Physics, Solid State Physics, and Cosmology. Four hours lecture. Co or Prerequisite: MATH 245 and MATH 333.
PHYS333,Thermal Physics & Fluids, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the thermodynamic principles of microstates, entropy, and heat engines as well as basic fluid mechanical concepts of buoyancy and fluid flow. Prerequisite: PHYS 232.
PHYS334,Computer Modeling of Physical Systems, (2 Credits)| An introduction to computer methods for the analysis, modeling and simulation of physical systems and analysis of experimental data. Applications taken from mechanics, fluids, electricity and magnetism. Prerequisites: PHYS 231 and MATH 231. Pre or Corequiste: MATH 232.
PHYS341,Analytical Mechanics, (4 Credits)| Particle and rigid body dynamics, central forces and gravitation, rotating systems and bodies, Lagrange and Hamilton formulations, generalized coordinates, and normal modes. Prerequisites: PHYS 334 and MATH 333. Pre or Co-requisite: MATH 245 and MATH 331.
PHYS342,Electromagnetic Theory, (4 Credits)| Electrostatics, steady currents, linear materials, electromagnetic induction, Maxwell's equations, and electromagnetic waves. Prerequisites: PHYS 334 and MATH 331. Pre or Corequisite: MATH 333. Alternate years.
PHYS343,Methods of Experimental Physics, (2 Credits)| Design of scientific investigations; experimental methods and instrumentation; construction of scientific arguments from data. Six hours laboratory. Prerequisites: PHYS 334 and Junior or higher standing. (lin)
PHYS344,Quantum Mechanics, (4 Credits)| Elements of quantum physics, solutions of Schrödinger's equation applied to atomic and molecular structure, applications, interpretations. Prerequisites: PHYS 334, MATH 331, MATH 245 and MATH 333. Alternate years.
PHYS345,Methods of Data Analysis and Presentation, (2 Credits)| Development of skills in data and error analysis, technical communication, and scientific argument. Prerequisite: PHYS 334 and Writing and Communication Competencies.
PHYS351,Analog Electronics, (2 Credits)| Basic principles of electronic circuits and devices. AC and DC circuit fundamentals, filters, diodes, transistors, amplifiers, and operational amplifiers. Four hours lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 232. Pre or Corequisite: PHYS 334.
PHYS352,Computer Data Acquisition, (2 Credits)| Digital electronics, analog to digital conversion, computer interfacing, and data acquisition with LabVIEW software. Four hours lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 351. Alternate years.
PHYS353,Introductory Optics, (2 Credits)| Electromagnetic and quantum mechanical theory of light, geometrical and physical optics, interference, diffraction, and optical instruments. Four hours lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 334. Alternate years.
PHYS354,Advanced Optics, (2 Credits)| Light propagation in matter, polarization, Fourier optics, aberrations, holography, lasers, and modern optical materials and components. Four hours lecture, three hours laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 353. Alternate years.
PHYS359,Thermodynamics, (4 Credits)| Theory of heat and gases, introduction to kinetic theory and statistical mechanics. Alternate years. Prerequisite: PHYS 333 and PHYS 334.
PHYS361,Solid State Physics and Nanotechnology, (2 Credits)| Bonding and structure of crystals, electronic properties of insulators, semiconductors, metals, and superconductors, limits of smallness, molecular assembly, and nanoscale physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 344 or CHEM 371. Alternate years.
PHYS362,Plasma Physics, (2 Credits)| Introduction to plasma physics including definition of a plasma, single particle and guiding center motions, fluid descriptions, waves, instabilities, and applications of plasma physics in space and astrophysics, controlled thermonuclear fusion, and industry. Pre or Corequisite: PHYS 342. Alternate years.
PHYS366,Particle Physics & Cosmology, (2 Credits)| Elementary particles, fundamental interactions, conservation laws and symmetries, big bang cosmology, dark matter and dark energy. Prerequisite: PHYS 334. Alternate years.
PHYS367,Introduction to Stellar and Galactic Astrophysics, (4 Credits)| Introduction to stellar and galactic astrophysics with an emphasis on the underlying physical principles. Course has an integrated lab component (2 hours lecture, 1 hour lab per week) Topics: Structure and evolution of stars, stellar atmospheres and spectra, binary stars and stellar remnants. Galactic dynamics, morphology, and evolution; large-scale structure of the universe. Prerequisites: MATH 333 and PHYS 334. Alternate years.
PHYS494,Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| Study of the wider cultural significance of physics including its historical development; its relationship to other disciplines; its philosophical interpretations; its place in a Christian worldview; and one's stewardship toward society. Independent study and classroom presentation. Prerequisite: senior standing in the major. (lin)
PHYS495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Independent research.
PHYS496,Internship, (2 to 4 Credits)| Supervised off-campus experience with departmental approval. Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with Physics major.
PHYS499,Honors Thesis, (2 to 4 Credits)| An independent project providing original physics research developed in a scholarly paper and culminating in an oral examination. Partially fulfills requirements for an honors degree in physics. Additional requirements are available in the Physics Office.
PSCI135,American Politics and Government, (4 Credits)| American Politics and Government. An introduction to the foundations and institutions of the United States' political system. Explores the political behavior of individuals and groups and engages contemporary political debate.
PSCI145,Political Philosophy, (4 Credits)| An exploration of some of the major themes in the tradition of western political thought, to include the nature of politics, freedom, equality, justice, and virtue. The course will center around some of the tradition’s most significant texts, including works by Plato, Augustine, Hobbes, Mill and more contemporary authors.
PSCI201,U,S, Education Policy: Problems and Possibilities, (4 Credits)| See EDUC 201
PSCI231,Chicago, (2 Credits)| An Introduction. See URBN 231.
PSCI235,Iowa Caucus, (2 Credits)| A hands-on exploration of the presidential nomination process including campaign work and observation of Iowa precinct caucuses. Presidential election years.
PSCI236,Intercollegiate Trial Advocacy, (0 or 1 Credits)| A hands-on exploration of the theory and practice of trial advocacy through competition in intercollegiate mock trial tournaments. Graded pass/fail. One credit hour per year based on full participation in the fall and spring semesters. Register for credit in the spring semester. Prerequisite: Instructor permission.
PSCI237,Women and Politics, (2 Credits)| An exploration of the role of American women and politics in the late nineteenth century and its transformation into the role of American women in politics by the late twentieth century. Legacy diversity designation.
PSCI244,Film and Political Theory, (2 Credits)| This course explores how films develop, offer, and apply arguments about human nature, human flourishing, and other topics central to normative theorizing about politics.
PSCI245,Politics & Pop Culture, (2 Credits)| An exploration and evaluation of portrayals of political themes and concepts in various forms of popular culture including film, television, and plays.
PSCI271,Introduction to Law, (2 Credits)| A study of the nature and function of law in society. Various disciplinary perspectives employed.
PSCI301,Topics in Political Science, (2 Credits)| Selected topics, designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of American politics and/or political behavior.
PSCI302,Topics in Political Science, (4 Credits)| Selected topics, designed to explore an important topic in American politics, political behavior, or political theory.
PSCI311,Constitutional Law, (4 Credits)| An examination of the American constitutional system, with special emphasis given to the role of judicial institutions and the impact of Supreme Court decisions.
PSCI332,Media and Politics, (4 Credits)| This course explores the interrelationship between the mass media (including print, broadcast, and new media), public opinion, and American politics. Prerequisite: PSCI 135 or equivalent.
PSCI343,Political Ethics, (4 Credits)| This course brings philosophical ethics and normative political theory into dialogue with the distinctive practical problems associated with contemporary American politics and policy. Topics to be considered include abortion, euthanasia, affirmative action, war, distributive justice, deception and manipulation, and the ethics of roles.
PSCI344,Women Politics and American Society, (4 Credits)| An exploration of the role of women in American politics from revolutionary times to the present, tracing the transformation of the role of American women from outsiders to more full participants in politics and government.
PSCI349,Christian Political Thought, (4 Credits)| An engagement with the varieties of Christian thinking about politics, including both its historical development and the contemporary alternatives. Thinkers explored will include Augustine, Aquinas, Luther, Calvin, Locke, Niebuhr, Hauerwas, and a number of others.
PSCI358,Campaigns in Context, (2 Credits)| An examination of federal, state, and local campaigns with an emphasis on the politics and context of the November election. Wheaton-in-Washington Program. PSCI 135 recommended.
PSCI359,Washington Workshop, (2 Credits)| Reflections on the meetings, briefings, and excursions in Washington, D.C. Wheaton-in-Washington Program.
PSCI361,Political Research, (4 Credits)| This course introduces research design to students using the context of political science. While there are many approaches to research design, we will focus upon quantitative analysis. At the introduction students will be exposed to the basic framework of theories, variables, and causation. Students will then construct a research design to test an original political science project. This course is designed to be an introduction to research methods so there are no pre-requisites. Students are encouraged to approach projects with creativity and ask questions.
PSCI365,Classical and Medieval Political Thought, (4 Credits)| The western political tradition rests on the interplay between the claims emerging out of classical Greece and Rome on the one hand and out of Christianity on the other. This course explores that interplay by engaging both classical (Homer, Sophocles, Plato, Aristotle) and Christian political thinkers (Augustine, Aquinas).
PSCI366,Modern Political Thought, (4 Credits)| This course chronicles the replacement of the Christian order and the development of its theoretical alternative, modernity. Thinkers considered include: Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Marx, Mill, Nietzsche, and Freud.
PSCI368,American Political Thought, (4 Credits)| An analysis of central ideas in the history of American political thought, from the founding to the present.
PSCI371,Public Opinion and American Democracy, (4 Credits)| This course helps students understand the factors that shape political attitudes and the actions they trigger in the United States. Particular attention is given to major methods and findings of survey research, as well as to implications of this research for how we think about the role of citizens in democracy.
PSCI374,Political Psychology: Understanding the Political Mind and Behavior, (4 Credits)| This course equips students to apply the concepts, theories, and methods of psychology to better understand political attitudes and behavior. It ephasizes how new reserach at the intersection of fields like psychology, biology, and neuroscience can inform our thinking about politics.
PSCI383,Religion & American Politics, (4 Credits)| An assessment of the role of religion in American politics, focusing especially on the contemporary era. Particular attention is given to the role of evangelicals. Periodic.
PSCI384,The Presidency, (4 Credits)| Examines the role of the presidency in the U.S. political system, focusing on such themes as leadership, decision-making, and Congressional-Executive relations. Alternate years.
PSCI385,Urban Politics, (2 Credits)| An analysis of the politics of urban areas, including relationships with state and national governments, decision-making, and urban public policy. Legacy diversity designation.
PSCI386,Congress & Policy Process, (4 Credits)| Congress and the Policy Process. An examination of the role of Congress in the American political process, including historical development, structure and functions, and decision-making. Recommended for those seeking Washington internships. Alternate years.
PSCI387,Law and Religion, (4 Credits)| This course is designed to introduce students to the moral, legal, and constitutional questions surrounding religion and its place in democratic public life. Students will have an opportunity to gain a familiarity with the development of American constitutional law as it relates to religion, explore the alternatives to those developments, understand the contending side of contemporary controversies, and articulate their own considered views on each via both presentations and writing exercises.
PSCI389,Campaigns and Elections, (4 Credits)| Explores the structures and institutions of American electoral politics, including the nomination process and general elections. Gives special attention to the elements of the modern campaign, including campaign finance, research, polling, advertising, and media use. Alternate years.
PSCI494,Senior Seminar, (2 Credits)| An analysis of the interrelationship of politics and the Christian faith, focusing on vocational, conceptual, legal, and domestic public policy issues. Senior majors only.
PSCI495,Independent Study, (2 to 4 Credits)| A guided individual reading and research problem. Junior and senior majors, or discretion of professor.
PSCI496,Internship, (4 Credits)| A series of programs designed for practical experience in professions frequently chosen by Political Science majors, such as law, government, and public service. Prerequisite: Political Science major with junior or senior standing and a minimum of 16 credits in the department.
PSCI499,Honors Thesis, (4 Credits)| An independent research project requiring original research, developed into a scholarly paper and culminating in an oral examination. By application only. The honors thesis may not be counted toward the total hours to complete the major.
LAW496,Pre-Law Internship, (4 Credits)| General elective credit for an internship with a practicing legal professional. Prerequisites: (i) junior or senior standing; (ii) a minimum of 16 hours of courses in the student's department major and 8 hours of required or elective courses toward the Pre-law Studies Certificate; (iii) the internship is for the Pre-law Studies Certificate, and the student is unable to secure approval for a Major Department 496 Internship; and (iv) approval of the Pre-Law Advisor. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC101,Introduction to Psychology, (4 Credits)| Provides an introduction to psychology as a social and behavioral science, focusing on its major topics, methods, theories, applications, and the integration of psychology and Christianity.
PSYC235,Cross-Cultural Psychology, (2 Credits)| An examination of the impact of culture on various psychological processes and systems. This course is designed for both majors and non-majors.
PSYC241,Social Psychology, (4 Credits)| A study of human thought, emotion, and behavior in an interpersonal context.
PSYC268,Statistics, (4 Credits)| An introduction to descriptive and inferential statistics used in research. Students will be taught how to conduct and interpret correlations, simple regression, several types of t-tests, analysis of variance (one-way and factorial with interaction), and chi-squared tests. Students will be introduced to the framework of hypothesis testing, type 1 and type 2 errors, and power. Prerequisite: PSYC 101.
PSYC269,Experimental Psychology, (4 Credits)| An examination of the research methods of psychology and the philosophy behind their use and an opportunity to apply these skills in research. Prerequisite: PSYC 268.
PSYC317,Developmental Psychology, (4 Credits)| An overview of the major theories, concepts, issues, data, and research methodologies of developmental psychology across the life span.
PSYC343,Sensation & Perception, (4 Credits)| A survey of the current scientific models, concepts, and integrative theories that encompass the field of human sensory and perceptual studies, with a special emphasis on the neurological and cognitive features of vision. Prerequisite: PSYC 269.
PSYC345,Learning, (4 Credits)| Examines learning through the Pavlovian and Skinnerian traditions from the early twentieth century up to the present day. Students will apply their course learning outside the classroom by engaging in behavioral training with an animal. Prerequisite: PSYC 269
PSYC348,Abnormal Psychology, (4 Credits)| An overview of the major theories, concepts, issues, data, and research methodologies of abnormal psychology. Emphasis on assessment, treatment, and prevention. Prerequisite: PSYC 101.
PSYC351,Cognition, (4 Credits)| A survey of the current scientific models, concepts, and integrative theories that encompass the field of human thought such as information processing, language, attention, and problem solving, as well as human perceptual experience and consciousness. Prerequisite: PSYC 269.
PSYC352,Contemporary Clinical Psyc, (4 Credits)| Contemporary Clinical Psychology. An overview of the major contemporary approaches to psychotherapy used in mental health settings. Includes an emphasis on the counselor as a person and as a professional, ethical issues in counseling practice, and essential counseling skills. Prerequisite: PSYC 348.
PSYC355,Advanced Statistics & Psychological Testing, (4 Credits)| An introduction to computer-based statistical analysis and psychological testing of child and adult intelligence, personality, and psychopathology. Topics include exploratory data analysis, multiple regression, factor analysis, scale construction. Students will also learn to administer and evaluate specific psychological tests. Prerequisite: PSYC 269 or consent of instructor.
PSYC361,Behavioral Neuroscience, (4 Credits)| An overview of the neuroanatomical, neurophysiological, and neurochemical underpinnings of sensory systems and the expression of behavior. Prerequisite: PSYC 269 or consent of instructor.
PSYC371,Intro to Psychopharmacology, (2 Credits)| This course examines the psychological effects and neurobiological mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugs, drugs that are used in the treatment of psychopathological disorders, and recreational drugs of abuse. This course is designed to provide undergraduate students interested in clinical psychology or psychopharmacology with an overview of the effects and mechanisms of substances which act on both the body and the brain. Prerequisite: PSYC 361
PSYC431,Psychology of Human Sexuality, (4 Credits)| An examination of human sexuality from the physiological, psychological, and social context. Topics include theories of psychosexual development, the nature of contemporary gender roles, ethnic identity, theological views of authentic sexuality, and cultural factors that impact sexual views and behaviors.
PSYC481,Advanced Topics in Psychology, (2 Credits)| Various Seminars.
PSYC494,Personality Psychology, (4 Credits)| This senior capstone course examines major personality theories, their individual assumptions on the nature of persons and their important contributions to the psychological field. Students are challenged to critically evaluate the world-view of each theorist from a Christian theological perspective. Prerequisite: Senior status or permission of instructor.
PSYC495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Individual library or experimental research carried on under the supervision of a staff member. Prerequisite: consent of the instructor.
PSYC496,Internship, (4 or 8 Credits)| Credit given for participation in the department's internship program. Prerequisites: five courses in psychology; junior or senior standing with Psychology major.
PSYC497,Collaborative Research Groups, (2 or 4 Credits)| Credit given for participation in faculty sponsored ongoing research program. The course may be repeated for a maximum of 8 credits, 4 of which may count as major elective. Prerequisite: PSYC 269
PSYC499,Honors Thesis, (4 or 8 Credits)| An independent project requiring original research developed in a scholarly paper and culminating in an oral examination. By application only.
PSYC512,Theories and Principles of Counseling, (3 Credits)| Designed for marriage and family therapy students, this course provides an examination of several of the major theories of counseling with an emphasis on techniques and principles common to each theory. This course does not count towards the M.A. in Clinical Psychology.
PSYC551,Counseling Challenges in Ministry, (2 Credits)| A psychoeducative approach is used to enable Christian leaders to help individuals and families understand and deal with contemporary issues—e.g., step-families, single parenting, divorce, abortion. Other topics covered include: coping with depression, strong emotions, i.e., anger and anxiety, conflict. This course does not count toward the M.A. in Clinical Psychology.
PSYC698,Master's Thesis, (4 Credits)| (4)
PSYC699,Master's Thesis Continuation, (0 Credits)| See M.A. Thesis/Applied Thesis/Action Research.
PSYC701,Foundations of Integration, (3 Credits)| A course in which an understanding of social, cultural, and spiritual context is developed to facilitate an integrated view of the person and of mental health practice. Emphases include historical, philosophical, theological perspectives, application of faith practice integration to the treatment of marginalized populations and service to the church worldwide.
PSYC714,Professional Development and Ethics I, (3 Credits)| An introduction to the practice of professional psychology, and to the ethical, legal, and professional issues confronting psychologists. Emphasis will be on fostering students' knowledge of the profession's ethics code and guidelines and on developing professional goals and behaviors. Special attention will be paid to the integration of Christian faith in accordance with the program’s mission statement. (3)
PSYC716,Basic Clinical Interviewing Skills, (3 Credits)| A basic skill course in clinical interviewing strategies and challenges.
PSYC717,Class Gender Race Religion & Sexual Identity, (3 Credits)| An introduction to the diverse populations psychologists serve and the clinical competencies necessary for effective psychologists.
PSYC721,History and Systems of Psychology, (3 Credits)| A study of the history of psychology, with particular emphasis upon understanding contemporary thought in the philosophy of science, and its implications for our understanding of the history and current status of the discipline.
PSYC731,Spirituality I, (1 Credit)| An introduction to spiritual formation and spiritual practices for developing clinical psychologists in the Christian tradition. This course will focus on spiritual practices and disciplines important to developing the relationship between human beings and a triune God.
PSYC732,Spirituality II, (1 Credit)| The second course in a sequence intended for spiritual formation and spiritual practices for developing clinical psychologists in the Christian tradition. This course will focus on spiritual practices and disciplines important to self-care.
PSYC733,Spirituality III, (1 Credit)| The third course in a sequence intended for spiritual formation and spiritual practices for developing clinical psychologists in the Christian tradition. This course will focus on spiritual practices and disciplines relevant to healthy community.
PSYC734,Spirituality IV, (1 Credit)| The fourth and final course in a sequence intended for spiritual formation and spiritual practices for developing clinical psychologists in the Christian tradition. This course emphasizes spiritual practices and disciplines focusing on Biblical justice.
PSYC736,Cognitive-Behavioral Theory and Practice, (3 Credits)| A core theory and clinical skill course in the cognitive-behavioral tradition. Covers the range of topics from traditional behavior modification to social-cognitive and cognitive views to third-wave therapies. (3)
PSYC737,Psychoanalytic and Contemporary Psychodynamic Theory and Practice, (3 Credits)| A core theory and clinical skill course in the psychodynamic tradition. Covers the range of topics from classical psychoanalysis through contemporary object-relations, self psychological, and relational psychoanalytic views.
PSYC738,Family Systems Theory and Therapy, (3 Credits)| A core theory and clinical skill course in the family systems tradition. An overview of the major approaches to family therapy with an emphasis on developmental and systemic models, and development of family assessment, conceptualization, and intervention skills. Prerequisites: PSYC 716, PSYC 736, PSYC 737. (3)
PSYC739,Community and Preventive Psychology, (3 Credits)| An examination of community and interpersonal factors causing and maintaining psychological dysfunction and well-being. Studies the preventive modes of mental health intervention.
PSYC743,Psychological Assessment I: Cognitive Foundations, (3 Credits)| An examination of the history of testing, and basic measurement theory and psychometrics. Includes exposure to the theory of intellectual and educational assessment with children and adults, and development of skills in administration, scoring, and interpretation of intellectual tests. (3)
PSYC744,Psychological Assessment II: Personality Foundations, (3 Credits)| An examination of the theory and practice of personality assessment with children and adults. Covers objective and projective assessment methods, and development of skills in administration, scoring, and interpretation of these instruments. (3)
PSYC745,Psychological Assessment III: Integrative Report Writing, (1 Credit)| A clinical skill course focusing on the development of competency in integrative report writing, including the synthesis of testing data and information.
PSYC746,Research and Statistics I, (3 Credits)| An introduction to statistical methodology, with an emphasis on cultivating students' basic conceptual understanding of statistics and research methods, as well as foundational skills in conducting analyses and in participating in a research team. (3)
PSYC747,Research and Statistics II, (3 Credits)| An introduction to research design which includes quantitative statistical research designs, with an emphasis on establishing a strong conceptual framework for understanding the range of research designs and how to select or match a design to research question/problem. Program evaluation methodology is also included. (3)
PSYC748,Research and Statistics III: Data Interpretation & Qualitative Analysis, (3 Credits)| An introduction to basic approaches of qualitative analysis and a focus on interpretation and reporting of quantitative data. (1)
PSYC753,Psychopathology, (3 Credits)| Doctoral-level examination of the categorization, diagnosis, etiology, and maintenance of abnormal behavior.
PSYC754,Biological Bases of Behavior, (3 Credits)| Covers the core knowledge in the biological bases of behavior for the practicing psychologist. (3)
PSYC755,Cognition & Emotion, (3 Credits)| Examines contemporary perspectives on thought, memory, emotion, and other higher mental processes.
PSYC756,Psychopharmacology, (3 Credits)| A core course introducing the student to psychopharmacological treatments of various psychological disorders.
PSYC761,Research Lab I, (1 Credit)| Research Lab I is the formal mechanism by which students' involvement in original empirical research is formulated and guided. The Research Lab I is the first of a formal academic sequence involving statistical analysis, research design and research application in a clinical context. Participation in the Research Lab I will help students' to build the necessary skills to generate and evaluate original research. The research lab supports dissertation process as part of the research and statistics sequence. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC762,Research Lab II, (1 Credit)| Research Lab II is the formal mechanism by which students' involvement in original empirical research is formulated and guided. The Research Lab II is the second of a formal academic sequence involving statistical analysis, research design and research application. Participation in the Research Lab II will help students' to build the necessary skills to generate and evaluate original research. The research lab supports dissertation process as part of the research and statistics sequence. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC763,Research Lab III, (1 Credit)| Research Lab III is the formal mechanism by which students' involvement in original empirical research is formulated and guided. The Research Lab III is the third of a formal academic sequence involving statistical analysis, research design and research application. Participation in the Research Lab III will help students' to build the necessary skills to generate and evaluate original research. The research lab supports dissertation process as part of the research and statistics sequence. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC764,Research Lab IV, (1 Credit)| Research Lab IV is the formal mechanism by which students' involvement in original empirical research is formulated and guided. The Research Lab IV is the fourth of a formal academic sequence involving statistical analysis, research design and research application. Participation in the Research Lab IV will help students' to build the necessary skills to generate and evaluate original research. The research lab supports dissertation process as part of the research and statistics sequence. Prerequisite: PSYC 761, 762 and 763. Graded pass/fail. (1)
PSYC773,Lifespan Development, (3 Credits)| Development throughout the lifespan from infancy through old age; focus on prominent developmental theories; protective and risk factors in atypical development.
PSYC774,Advanced Social Psychology, (3 Credits)| Advanced topics of relevance to understanding human behavior in its social context. (3)
PSYC781,Advanced Ethics and Professional Issues, (3 Credits)| Advanced training in special topics among ethical, legal, and professional issues confronting the psychologist in practice. Prerequisites: PSYC 714. (3)
PSYC782,Clinical Supervision and Consultation, (3 Credits)| Introduction to practice of effective supervision and training of mental health professionals and the skills needed to provide consultations with other professionals and organizations. Prerequisites: PSYC 796 - Practica I & II. (3)
PSYC795,Practicum Seminar, (1 Credit)| A seminar group designed to facilitate the personal, professional, and spiritual formation of doctoral students who are concurrently in practica placements. Required attendance at both individual and group meetings. Co-requisite: PSYC 796. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC796,Practica I II III IV, (2 Credits)| A doctoral-level practicum covering assessment, treatment planning, case management, and psychotherapeutic intervention. Graded pass/fail. (each 2)
PSYC797,Practica-Seminar I II III IV, (0 Credits)| A seminar group designed to facilitate the personal, professional, and spiritual formation of doctoral students who are concurrently in practica placements. Required attendance at both individual and group meetings. Required with PSYC 796. Graded pass/fail. (each 2 credits)
PSYC798,Practicum V/VI, (0 Credits)| An advanced doctoral-level practicum covering assessment, treatment planning, case management, and psychotherapeutic intervention. Prerequisite: eight credit hours of PSYC 796. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC833,Couple Therapy, (3 Credits)| A core theory and clinical skill course in the field of couple therapy. Covers a range of views including the behavioral, family systems, and psychodynamic. Prerequisite: PSYC 738.
PSYC837,Developmental Psychopathology, (3 Credits)| A foundational course providing an overview of developmental clinical child psychology. Emphasis will be given to an understanding of theology and developmental theories and research in relation to child psychopathology and clinical practice.
PSYC838,Advanced Couple and Family Therapy, (3 Credits)| An advanced seminar focusing on integrative models of couple and family therapy with a special emphasis on issues of ethnicity and gender. Students will develop the skills important in working with multiproblem couples and families. Students will also be introduced to models of couple and family supervision. Open to both M.A. and Psy.D. Clinical Psychology students. Prerequisites: Psy.D. PSYC 738, M.A. CMHC 636. (3)
PSYC843,Neuropsychological Assessment, (3 Credits)| Introduction to theory and practice of assessing brain function and its behavioral correlates.
PSYC844,Child Psychological Assessment, (3 Credits)| A clinical skill course focusing on the administration, scoring, and interpretation of child psychological assessment strategies. Specific developmental considerations in assessment of this population will be examined.
PSYC845,Child & Adolescent Interventions, (3 Credits)| A clinical skills course introducing students to evidence-based intervention strategies targeting commonly seen diagnoses in children and adolescents. Developmental, cultural, and familial considerations in treatment are emphasized. Prerequisites: PSYC 716, 736, 737. (3)
PSYC846,Geropsychology, (3 Credits)| Assessment and treatment of older adults and associated issues, including neuropsychological assessment and different diagnosis. Open to both M.A. and Psy.D. Clinical Psychology students.
PSYC849,Sexuality & Sex Therapy, (3 Credits)| An advanced elective introducing the student to the assessment and treatment of sexual dysfunction using a biopsychosocial model. Open to both M.A. and Psy.D. Clinical Psychology students.
PSYC851,Substance Abuse, (3 Credits)| A survey of basic issues surrounding the conceptualization, etiology, progression assessment, and treatment of chemical abuse, dependence, and addiction, including the study of the family of the chemically dependent individual.
PSYC853,Behavioral Medicine and Health Psychology, (3 Credits)| Contemporary theory and practice course exploring the relationship of psychological and behavioral change in relation to medical and other health-related matters. Prerequisite: PSYC 754.
PSYC854,Collaborative Psychological Practice in Primary Care, (3 Credits)| An advanced clinical course introducing students to the role of the mental health professional in the primary health context. Diagnostic, intervention and interdisciplinary consultation skills necessary for effective practice in fast-paced, high-volume interdisciplinary healthcare settings are taught with an emphasis on Motivational Interviewing and brief interventions for change. Contextual focus is placed on the value of collaborative approaches with underserved communities and populations. (3)
PSYC861,Spiritual Direction and Care of the Soul, (3 Credits)| An introduction to the contemporary and classical literature and traditions of Christian spirituality and spiritual direction and their relevance to the helping professions. Psychology's neglect of the spiritual life and of the church's tradition of soul care is addressed. (3)
PSYC862,Advanced Integration of Psychology & Christian Theology, (3 Credits)| This course will focus on the integration of the Christian faith and clinical psychology. Students will be provided in-depth exposure to the literature regarding Christianity-psychology integration. Specific topics in emerging trends in the field will be selected and analyzed by the class in light of their theological coursework in the doctoral program. Prerequisite: PSYC 701
PSYC881,Advanced Practicum I, (2 Credits)| This advanced clinical experience emphasizes the development of assessment, diagnosis and intervention through supervised practice at a variety of field settings. Concurrent enrollment in PSYC 882 - Advanced Practicum Seminar I. Meetings include didactic learning, case presentations and team meetings. Prerequisites: eight credit hours of PSYC 796 and 4 credits of PSYC 795. Co-requisite: PSYC 882. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC882,Advanced Practicum I Seminar, (1 Credit)| This seminar supporting advanced clinical experiences emphasizes the development of assessment, diagnosis and intervention through supervised practice at a variety of field settings. Concurrent enrollment in PSYC 881. Meetings include didactic learning, case presentations and team meetings. Prerequisites: eight credit hours of PSYC 796 and 4 credits of PSYC 795. Co-requisite: PSYC 881. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC883,Advanced Practicum II, (1 Credit)| This advanced clinical experience emphasizes the development of assessment, diagnosis and intervention through supervised practice at a variety of field settings. Concurrent enrollment in PSYC 884 - Advanced Practicum Seminar II. Prerequisite: PSYC 881. Co-requisite: PSYC 884. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC884,Advanced Practicum II Seminar, (1 Credit)| This seminar supporting advanced clinical experiences emphasizes the development of assessment, diagnosis and intervention through supervised practice at a variety of field settings. Concurrent enrollment in PSYC 883 - Advanced Practicum II. Meetings include didactic learning, case presentations and team meetings. Prerequisites: PSYC 881 and 882. Co-requisite: PSYC 883. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC891,Advanced Clerkship, (0 Credits)| Supervised advanced clinical experience in an approved setting. Prerequisites: eight credit hours of PSYC 796 and 2 semesters of PSYC 894. Attendance at Grand Rounds is required. Graded pass/fail. (0)
PSYC892,Advanced Clerkship II, (0 Credits)| Supervised advanced clinical experience in an approved setting. Prerequisites: eight credit hours of PSYC 796 and 2 semesters of PSYC 894 and 2 semesters of PSYC 891. Attendance at Grand Rounds required. Graded pass/fail. (0)
PSYC893,Seminar: Advanced Topics in Clinical Psychology, (1 Credit)| Advanced topics in clinical psychology presented and discussed in a two-full-day seminar. Readings required prior to attendance. Graded pass/fail. Open to both M.A. and Psy.D. Clinical Psychology students. Program limit: M.A. 4 hours; Psy.D. 12 hours including PSYC 895 hours. (1)
PSYC894,Clerkship, (0 Credits)| Supervised clinical experience in an approved setting. Prerequisites: eight credit hours of PSYC 796. Attendance at Grand Rounds is required. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC895,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| (1-4)
PSYC896,Clinical Internship, (0 Credits)| Degree requires registration in this course for two semesters and one summer. Graded pass/fail.
PSYC898,Clinical Dissertation, (1 to 4 Credits)| Degree requires a total of 10 or 13 credits (depending on catalog year) for the clinical dissertation. (1, 2, 3, 4)
PSYC899,Clinical Dissertation Continuation, (0 Credits)| (Full-time).
PSYC991,Comprehensive Exam, (0 Credits)| A programmatic milestone testing mastery of fundamental academic concepts necessary for professional psychologists. Students are permitted up to 3 exam attempts in a 12 month period before being assigned a final grade for the course. PSYC 991 may not be repeated. Pass/fail. Prerequisites: PSYC 714, 716, 717, 721, 736, 737, 738, 743, 744, 745, 746, 747, 753, 754, 755, 773, and 774.
PSYC992,Professional Qualifying Exam (PQE), (0 Credits)| Professional clinical qualifying exam - the 2nd qualifying exam. Pass/fail. Prerequisites: PSYC 991 unless petitioned to Psy.D. Program Clinical Training Committee.
PSYC993,Clinical Dissertation Proposal, (0 Credits)| Clinical Dissertation Proposal defense. Pass/fail. Prerequisites: PSYC 991.
PSYC999,Clinical Dissertation Continuation, (0 Credits)| (Part-time).
RELI212,World Religions:Asia, (2 Credits)| A survey of the living religious traditions of South and East Asia, including that of Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, Parsees, Taoists, Confucianists, and Shintoists. Legacy diversity designation.
RELI214,World Religions: Middle East, (2 Credits)| A survey of the living religious traditions of the Middle East, emphasizing Judaism and Islam. Legacy diversity designation.
RELI225,Major World Religions, (4 Credits)| A survey of the living religions traditions of South and East Asia, including Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism, and Shintoism, and also the living religious traditions of the Middle East, emphasizing Judaism and Islam. Students will acquire understanding of the complex category of religions, become familiar with the basic methodological approaches employed in religious studies, and gain an overview knowledge of the histories, beliefs, and practices of the various traditions discussed. In addition, students will engage the reality of religious diversity through a distinctively Christian theological lens.
RELI362,Judaism, (2 Credits)| An introduction to the historical development of the religion of Judaism, including Messianic Judaism; its origins, literature, Holy Days, rituals, theologies, movements, and future. A visit to a synagogue service is an integral part of the course.
RELI364,Islam, (4 Credits)| A study of the origins of Islam in Arabia and its spread throughout the world. Special attention is given to Mohammed, the Qur'an, major tenets of Islam, different sects within Islam, the interface between Christianity and Islam, and the recent rise of Islamic fundamentalism.
RELI492,Topical Studies, (2 or 4 Credits)| A phenomenological investigation across several religious traditions. Topics such as fundamentalism, cosmology, sacred writings, or mysticism will be covered.
RELI495,Directed Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| -
SCI211,Natural Systems of the Northwoods, (2 Credits)| An integrative science course centering on natural history and systems with an exploration of abiotic and biotic factors. Offered exclusively during the summer for education students only (preservice teachers) at HoneyRock. Su only.
SCI229,Internship/Seminar in the Health Professions, (2 Credits)| Economic, political, sociological, psychological, and ethical problems facing health professionals and some biblical responses to these problems. Designed for students with a definite interest in one of the health professions, this course provides opportunity to observe the field first hand through a required shadowing internship, and to study the scope of health care in the U.S. Prerequisites: sophomore standing, registration with the Health Professions Program, one year of college biology or chemistry, consent of instructor. Does not apply toward the general education science requirement. (lin)
SCI301,Natural Science: Foundations Methods Challenges, (4 Credits)| A historical and philosophical study of methodological and foundational issues in the natural sciences focusing principally on physics, astronomy, biology, and challenges the natural sciences present to culture. Prerequisite: Any SP course.
SCI302,Origins of Scientific Thought, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the history of science, helping students understand its value for making sense of our contemporary cultural context. This is accomplished through studying the development of natural philosophy and the emergence of scientific methods and modes of thought. Particular emphasis is placed on the philosophical, religious, and institutional contexts, continuity and change over time, causality, contingency, and complexity of the emergence of scientific thought. This course engages in an in-depth exploration of a period, issue, concept, key figures, or a set of over-arching questions.
SCI311,Theories of Origins, (4 Credits)| Examination of scientific theories of origins and development, such as Big Bang cosmology, Earth's formation and early history, origin of life, origin of species, history of life, and human origins. Relationships between biblical and scientific explanations are explored for each topic. Prerequisite: any SP course. Field trip fee. Counts as upper division science requirement under legacy gen ed.
SCI321,Science for Middle and High School Teachers, (2 Credits)| Required for science majors who plan to teach high school. Survey of science curricula, computer applications in science teaching, laboratory theory and evaluation processes, management of laboratories, and field trips. Prerequisites: ten hours of education courses and ten hours of courses in teaching area major.
SCI322,Elementary Grade Education Science Curriculum, (2 Credits)| Required for elementary education majors. Survey of elementary science curricula and resources; consideration of perspective, process, content, and application of science in teaching. Concurrent with EDUC 305L, 311, 311L, 312, 315, 317, SSCI 321 or consent of instructor. Prerequisites: ten hours of education courses and at least one science laboratory course.
SCI325,Methods of Teaching Middle Grade Science, (2 Credits)| Required for those seeking an endorsement for teaching middle grade science. Includes theories and methods for teaching science at the middle grade level (grades 5-8). Topics include effective teaching strategies, planning, and assessment of science content, particularly with science processes and inquiry. Based on the Next Generation Science Standards and the Illinois Professional Teaching Standards. Prerequisite: Admission to the WheTEP program.
SCI393,Interdisciplinary Studies in Science, (2 to 4 Credits)| Interdisciplinary study of topics in the natural sciences. Prerequisite: a lab course in the Studies in Nature cluster. Does not satisfy the Nature cluster non-lab legacy general education credit.
SCI494,Nursing Capstone, (2 Credits)| The capstone seminar will evaluate contemporary issues within nursing and healthcare with special attention to some biblical responses to these issues. This course provides opportunity to observe the field of nursing firsthand through a required shadowing internship, and to study the scope of healthcare in the U.S. Prerequisites: Junior standing, declared LA-Nursing major, consent of instructor. (lin)
SSCI321,Elementary and Middle School Curricular Themes in the Social Sciences, (2 Credits)| Focuses on Social Science content (history, economics, political science, sociology, anthropology, and geography) and effective methods for teaching the social sciences in elementary and middle schools. Concurrent with EDUC 311, 311L, 312, 315, 317, 305L, SCI 322. Prerequisites: EDUC 135, 136, 136L, 225, 225L, 305, MATH 125 and admission to WheTEP.
SWEL331,Introduction to Social Welfare, (2 Credits)| Examination and critique of the social welfare institution in America; its history, value orientation, issues past and present, and the agencies through which social welfare is administered. Christian perspective, agency visits, and field trip.
SWEL332,Human Services Practice, (2 Credits)| Development of self-awareness for the human services professional. Introduction to methods used in social work practice, interviewing, assessment, and treatment planning. Professional social workers as guest speakers.
SWEL496,Social Work Internship, (4 or 8 Credits)| A field experience providing opportunities for observation and participation in selected welfare agencies. Knowledge of community resources; skill and technique development; theory-in-practice experience. Offered as a block placement for an entire semester. Placements are made in the Chicago area. Sociology majors may apply eight hours of internship credit toward one sociology elective course. Prerequisites: SWEL 331, 332. See department for details.
SOC115,Introduction to Sociology, (4 Credits)| An overview of the theory, methodology, and conceptualizations of the discipline of sociology. Offers the opportunity to develop an understanding of American society and the diversity within it. Legacy diversity designation. Meets legacy general education requirement.
SOC116,Introduction to Sociology, (4 Credits)| An overview of the theory, methodology, and conceptualization of the discipline of sociology. Offers opportunity to develop an understanding of society in the United States and beyond.
SOC228,Sociology of Sexuality, (2 Credits)| This class will explore issues of identity as sexual individuals, the role of sexuality in our broader society, and the linkages between sexuality and violence. As sexuality affects both individuals and the larger society, this class aims to equip and challenge students in building a positive and God-honoring conception of sexuality in their own lives and their engagement in the world. Prerequisite (or requisite): Open to sophomores, juniors, and seniors.
SOC238,Contemporary Social Concerns, (2 Credits)| An in-depth seminar focusing on major concerns of society, such as: problems of youth, the elderly, AIDS, homelessness, human rights, prison reform, and toxic waste.
SOC241,Social Psychology, (4 Credits)| See PSYC 241.
SOC251,Culture Media and Society, (4 Credits)| Americans are surrounded by the culture and media: television, movies, music, stories and narratives, the Internet and Facebook, cultural norms and values, advertising and more vie for our attention each day. How are these social forms generated and sustained? How do we make sense of them from a sociological and Christian perspective? Students will learn and apply three analytic approaches to culture (repertoires, production, and narratives) as they consider how everyday interactions with culture and media affect Evangelical life. Legacy diversity designation. Meets legacy general education requirement. Note: This course does not fulfill the entire VPA theme and covers only the domain of visual arts.
SOC321,Sociology of Economic Life, (4 Credits)| In an era of growing economic inequality, this course employs a sociological approach to ask questions about social construction of markets and the moral meanings within them. The goal of the course is to empower students in their roles as economic agents, as well as help them understand the broader structures in which they are engaged.
SOC337,Racial and Ethnic Relations, (4 Credits)| Sociohistorical and cultural aspects of race and ethnicity in America. Through class discussion, films, and research about minority cultures, students explore and examine such sociological concepts as assimilation, conflict, and pluralism. Prerequisite: SOC 115 or 116 and sophomore standing or above, or consent of the instructor. Legacy diversity designation.
SOC341,Social & Political Movements, (4 Credits)| Social movements challenge political, economic, and social systems through collective action. We will discuss why social movements occur, how actors become involved, their relationship with the state, and the resources needed to sustain and grow such movements. Using a case study approach, students examine particular social actors and differing views of justice, while being encouraged to further develop their own conception of biblical justice in society. Legacy diversity designation.
SOC347,Gender & Society, (4 Credits)| What does it mean to be male or female? Why do we have these categories? How does gender matter in society? In this class, we focus on unpacking the concept of gender, and investigate the role of social institutions in constructing gender roles and contributing to gender inequalities. There is also an emphasis understanding how issues of gender intersect with those of class, race, and culture.
SOC355,Social Class & Inequality, (4 Credits)| An examination of the theories and explanations of the origins and perpetuation of social inequality, class, and stratification. Consideration of both classical and modern perspectives, as well as explanations of the relationship among stratification, status, occupation, and mobility; descriptions of various class characteristics and an examination of selected relationships between class and other areas of social participation. Legacy diversity designation.
SOC356,The Family, (4 Credits)| A sociological approach to the practices that exist within families, the relationships between family members, and the social influences that shape the decisions of families. This course will challenge students to think about how religious institutions and politics can strengthen families and individuals within them. Legacy diversity designation. Meets legacy general education requirement.
SOC359,American Suburbanization, (4 Credits)| This course examines how and why American suburbs became the home of a majority of Americans and important centers for economic and cultural life. Emphasis will be placed on understanding and researching nearby suburbs (Wheaton and surrounding communities) and how Christians might respond to suburbia. Legacy diversity designation.
SOC364,Urban Sociology, (4 Credits)| Growth and patterning of city life; social relations and social institutions in the city; examination of urban problems and proposed solutions. Prerequisite: SOC 115 or 116 or consent of the instructor.
SOC366,Sociology Of Religion, (4 Credits)| Religion as a social phenomenon and its functions for the individual and society. Focus upon religious socialization, measurement of religious behavior, and variety of religious roles; includes organizational forms and relationships to other social institutions. Prerequisite: SOC 115 or 116 or consent of the instructor.
SOC367,Crime & Delinquency, (4 Credits)| The incidence, nature, and development of crime and delinquency in America; methods of control, treatment, and prevention, including current research and innovations in approaching juvenile and adult offenders. Prerequisite: SOC 115 or 116 or consent of the instructor.
SOC371,Asians in America, (4 Credits)| This course is designed to help students understand the diversity and histories of Asian Americans with a focus on the post-1965 waves. In addition to understanding Asian Americans from sociological and historical categories, we will also examine religion in the Asian American experiences. Legacy diversity designation.
SOC373,Sociology of Education, (4 Credits)| Examines the social role of education in postindustrial societies. Different types of schools and their effects on academic achievement are examined, and students are encouraged to participate in the growth and development of schools where possible. Christian perspectives on education, learning, and schools are emphasized. Prerequisite: SOC 115 or 116 or consent of the instructor.
SOC376,Sociological Theory, (4 Credits)| A survey of social thought of classical theorists, such as Weber, Durkheim, and Marx, as well as an overview of contemporary social theory. Addresses the various theoretical perspectives, as well as the current lack of consensus in social theory. Legacy diversity designation.
SOC383,Statistics, (4 Credits)| An introduction to statistics common in social research. Topics include descriptive and inferential statistics, hypothesis testing, significance, correlation, analysis of variance, and multiple regression. Emphasis is on application and effectively using a common statistical program (SPSS).
SOC385,Social Change, (4 Credits)| What forces contribute to social change? In this class, we examine some of the changes that have occurred and are occurring throughout the world that impact the ability of people to live lives of human flourishing. We will explore some of the socio-historical contexts related to social change, such as political forces, economic markets, technological innovation, and demographic and population changes. Students will have an opportunity to focus on contemporary issues related to social change in a specific country of interest. Students will also reflect on a number of different Christian theological documents on globalization, and develop their own faith perspective on what it means to follow Christ in a globalized world. Meets legacy general education requirement for HNGR students only.
SOC399,Social Network Analysis: Theory and Methods, (4 Credits)| Social network analysis is at the core of sociology in the 21st century, with international implications in education, law enforcement, and many other fields. A vast arena of research possibilities currently exists for using social networks to study churches, denominations, parachurch ministries, academic institutions and communities of all kinds. This course examines the history, components, and applications of social network analysis. Using Mathematica, students will complete supervised research projects using methods in social network analysis.
SOC412,Advanced Topics in Sociology, (2 Credits)| This course is aimed at students capable of or interested in graduate level study. There will be a specific theme for each semester of the course, and these will not be repeated two years in a row. Some possible examples include advanced methodology, gender and international development, and immigration and policy.
SOC414,Advanced Topics in Sociology, (4 Credits)| This course is aimed at students capable of or interested in graduate level study. There will be a specific theme for each semester of the course, and these will not be repeated two years in a row. Some possible examples include mathmematical sociology, advanced methodology, historical and comparatve sociology, economic and organizational sociology, and social network analysis. Pre-requisite: SOC 376 or SOC 383 or permission of instructor.
SOC482,Social Research, (4 Credits)| Introduces students to techniques and methods for scientific research in the social sciences including surveys, experiments, field research, coding, and more. A cumulative project follows the steps of producing social science research including developing a research question, writing a literature review, and explaining the use of data and methods. Corequisites or Prerequisites: SOC 115, 116; SOC 376, 383, or consent of the instructor.
SOC492,Thesis Research, (4 Credits)| Students will work closely with the faculty advisor to collect and analyze data, write a senior thesis paper, and present their research in a public setting. They will also work with other students to workshop papers. Required for the sociology major. Prerequisite: SOC 494
SOC494,Senior Capstone, (4 Credits)| A capstone seminar focusing on the integration of sociology and Christianity. Examination of the philosophies, literature, and research of selected problem areas in the discipline. Recommended for seniors. Prerequisites: SOC 115 or 116; SOC 376 or consent of the instructor.
SOC495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Guided reading and research for the advanced major or research internship in ongoing institutional or faculty research. Formal student proposal required.
SOC496,Internship in Sociology, (4 or 8 Credits)| Credit given in connection with internship assignment in social research, criminal justice, law, urban ministries, urban planning, or social policy. Offered as a block placement for an entire semester on or off campus (in the Chicago area). Sociology majors may apply eight hours of internship credit toward one sociology elective course. See department for details, including course prerequisites.
SPAN101,Elementary Spanish, (4 Credits)| Beginning Spanish with emphasis on listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Introduction to aspects of culture of Spanish-speaking communities. Online drill work. Cannot receive credit for both (SPAN 101, 102) and SPAN 103.
SPAN102,Elementary Spanish, (4 Credits)| Beginning Spanish with emphasis on listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Introduction to aspects of culture of Spanish-speaking communities. Online drill work. Cannot receive credit for both (SPAN 101, 102) and SPAN 103.
SPAN103,Accelerated Elementary Spanish, (4 Credits)| Intensive study of elementary Spanish with emphasis on listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Introduction to aspects of culture of Spanish-speaking communities. Required of students with only two years of high school Spanish. Online drill work.
SPAN201,Intermediate Spanish, (4 Credits)| Conversation, composition, and grammar review based on readings and videos; exploration of various aspects of culture of Spanish-speaking communities. Required of students with three or four years of high school Spanish. Online drill work. Prerequisite to any further study in Spanish. Prerequisite: SPAN 102 or 103 (or equivalent)
SPAN331,Spanish Conversation, (4 Credits)| Intensive practice in oral communication with emphasis on listening comprehension and natural spoken expression based on videos and readings of authentic materials. Legacy diversity designation. Lab fee.
SPAN332,Advanced Grammar and Composition, (4 Credits)| Intensive grammar review and written practice in various forms to improve accuracy and authenticity of expression. Readings, films, and discussion.
SPAN334,Spanish Culture and Civilization, (4 Credits)| On-site study of Spanish history, architecture, art, politics, and society. Offered in Spain only. Prerequisite: SPAN 331 or 332, Co-requisite: SPAN 352 (Spain country study).
SPAN335,Latin American Culture and Civilization, (4 Credits)| Readings and discussion of history, geography, political and social structures, various forms of artistic expression particular to Latin America. Recommended for IR and Education students. Legacy diversity designation.
SPAN337,Survey of Spanish American Literature, (4 Credits)| A general survey of the development of Spanish American literature from the pre-Columbian period to the present. Examination and analysis of representative authors and genres. Legacy diversity designation.
SPAN338,Intensive Advanced Spanish, (4 Credits)| Advanced grammar, conversation, and composition taught by native speakers in Spain or a Latin American university setting. Course content and level variable. Offered in Spain or Latin America only. Legacy diversity designation.
SPAN341,Writing the Empire: Spanish Literature before 1800, (4 Credits)| A general survey of Spanish literature from the beginnings of the language to 1800. Examination and analysis of representative authors and genres. Offered fall semester. Prerequisite: Spanish language proficiency.
SPAN342,Global Spain: Spanish Literature after 1800, (4 Credits)| A general survey of Spanish literature from 1800 to the present. Examination and analysis of representative authors and genres. Offered spring semester. Prerequisite: Spanish language proficiency.
SPAN352,Topics in Spanish Language and Hispanic Literatures and Culture, (2 Credits)| Varied subjects including genre, author, movement and country studies, film, culture, and advanced language. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: SPAN 331 or equivalent or permission of instructor. (2)
SPAN353,Topics in Spanish Language and Hispanic Literatures and Culture, (4 Credits)| Varied subjects including genre, author, movement and country studies, film, culture, and advanced language. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: SPAN 331 or equivalent or permission of instructor. (4)
SPAN357,Latino Cultures in the United States, (4 Credits)| An introduction to the heterogeneity of cultures, histories and identities encompassed by the term Latino/a including various Latino sub-groups in the United States (Mexican, Caribbean, Central and South American), exploring social, political, economic and linguistic issues surrounding each of these groups today. Themes may include the Latino diaspora, cultural definition as identity, the U.S.-Mexican border, assimilation and resistance, Latino/a stereotyping, language and religion.
SPAN371,Methods of Teaching Foreign Languages, (4 Credits)| The study of various methodologies, theories, and techniques of foreign language teaching; introduction to linguistics for second-language acquisition. Practice in a variety of micro-teaching situations. Required for secondary education licensure; otherwise, an elective toward major or minor.
SPAN389,Costa Rica Culture & Society, (4 Credits)| The course focuses on the historical development of Costs Rica from the nineteenth century to the present, highlighting fundamental differences between Costa Rica, neighboring Nicaragua, and the rest of Central America. Topics include: banana production, the coffee industry, and tourism. Particular emphasis is given to Christ-centered responses to patterns of poverty, violence, injustice, and ethnic discrimination that such industries have created in Costa Rica and Central America.
SPAN439,Topics in Spanish Language and Hispanic Literatures and Culture, (2 or 4 Credits)| Varied subjects including genre and movement studies, film, culture, and advanced language. May be repeated for credit. Legacy diversity designation.
SPAN489,Topics in Hispanic Culture, (2 to 4 Credits)| Varied subjects, including literary and cultural study with emphasis on Christian perspectives of Hispanic culture. Academic site visits. Offered only in Spain or Latin America.
SPAN493,Mentoring Seminar, (2 or 4 Credits)| Faculty and student collaboration on a project of mutual interest. Limited enrollment - faculty approval required.
SPAN494,Senior Seminar, (4 Credits)| Examination of literary or cultural topics from perspectives of contemporary critical theory. Students produce a major research paper that integrates faith with the subject matter. Prerequisites: SPAN 331, 332, study abroad; SPAN 341 or 342; SPAN 337. Lab fee required.
SPAN495,Independent Study, (1 to 4 Credits)| Reading and individual study of selected aspect of Hispanic culture, literature, or language. Department approval required.
SPAN496,Internship, (2 or 4 Credits)| Department approval required. Graded pass/fail. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing with Spanish major.
URBN114,Social Life of Cities, (4 Credits)| This course introduces students to the study of cities and their associated social phenomena, while crafting a biblically informed perspective upon various urban issues. Students engage a broad range of research upon cities in a variety of domestic and international contexts through class readings, lectures and multimedia presentations. Key concepts which have been used to characterize the distinctiveness of urban life are introduced and discussed, with attention to the comparative experiences of contemporary cities.
URBN231,Chicago: An Introduction, (2 Credits)| Survey of the city's ethnic, economic, and institutional diversity will be presented through lectures, slides, and field trips. Special emphasis on the problems and promises of urban life. Legacy diversity designation.
URBN233,Chicago, (4 Credits)| This course explores the social dynamics of Chicago, a city defined by its elegant façade and deeply shadowed backstage, to quote one scholar. Students will learn about Chicago's history, as well as several contemporary issues and controversies, by focusing on economic history, race, race relations, ethnicity, and immigration, and environmental justice.
URBN296,Urban Studies Practicum, (2 or 4 Credits)| Supervised field placements and mentorship in urban contexts. Students must have sophomore standing to be eligible. Provides opportunities for vocational discernment and requires students to think through the ways in which their field experience will inform the coursework they will complete as juniors and seniors.
URBN321,Urban Issues and Active Faith, (2 Credits)| An interdisciplinary course designed to help students integrate their internship, classroom, and daily life experiences while living in the city under the Wheaton in Chicago program.
URBN352,Topics in Urban Studies, (2 Credits)| Selected topics, designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of cities and Urban Studies. May include such subjects as The Chicago School of Urban Studies, Urban Planning & Contemporary Environments, and The City in Film. Occasional.
URBN354,Topics in Urban Studies, (4 Credits)| Selected topics, designed to give added breadth and depth to the understanding of cities and Urban Studies. May includes such subjects as The Chicago School of Urban Studies, Urban Planning & Sustainable Environments, and The City in Film. Occasional.
URBN362,Global Cities: Cities and the World, (4 Credits)| See IR 362.
URBN371,Race Poverty and Reconciliation, (4 Credits)| This course examines the social, economic and spiritual factors involved in racial reconciliation and overcoming poverty and how people of faith are developing strategies to build bridges across racial and economic barriers.
URBN373,The City in Popular Culture, (2 Credits)| Explores common representations of the city as they emerge within the media of popular culture. These characterizations of the city are critically considered within frameworks of anthropological analysis and therefore highlight issues of meaning, practice, history and human agency. (2)
URBN383,Cities in the Global South, (2 Credits)| Cities in the global south today face a variety of challenges, requiring careful negotiation through policy and everyday practice. This course introduces students to the particular issues which colonial histories and peripheral participation in global markets have produced in some key cities of the global south. Strategies and innovations for future development are presented as possibilities for local agency and transformation.
URBN385,Urban Politics, (2 Credits)| Legacy diversity designation. See PSCI 385.
URBN391,Community Based Research and Public Health, (4 Credits)| See AHS 391.
URBN393,Placemaking in Urban Contexts, (2 Credits)| Explores the processes by which particular configurations of history, identity and landscape are transformed into identifiable and meaningful places in the construction and development of cities. Case studies will be drawn from multiple cities around the world, including Scotland, China, and Africa and will examine the use of local and global narratives, images, and logics, highlighting the socially contested and constructed nature of this process.
URBN399,Pre-field Preparation, (0 Credits)| Prepares students for undertaking a field experience in Chicago with the Wheaton In Chicago program. Through correspondence with a faculty member in Urban Studies, students are introduced to relevant practical issues and challenges, particularly related to cross-cultural competencies, as well as many resources which will be available to them through the duration of their experiential education program. This course equips students to maximize the impact of their urban field experience, develop practical intercultural skills, and positively and holistically contribute to life in a community.
URBN455,American Urban History, (4 Credits)| See HIST 455.
URBN494,Advanced Urban Studies Seminar, (2 Credits)| This capstone course requires integrative, interdisciplinary reflection upon emerging urban forms, urban field experiences, and vocation. Undergraduate students must have completed and urban field experience (e.g., Wheaton in Chicago) or internship prior to enrolling in the course, unless they secure the consent of the Urban Studies Program Director.
URBN495,Independent Study, (2 to 4 Credits)| Directed reading and research during the student's urban field experience.
URBN496,Internship, (2 to 8 Credits)| Supervised field experience in an urban setting, usually Chicago. The internship is designed to meet the particular interests of the student, as well as the needs of the host organization and neighborhood. Graded pass/fail.
